-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Civilization
  For Super NES

  Walkthrough

  By Jungon
  joaobuaes@gmail.com

  2015/12/30

  Version 0.90


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Contents:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Section . . . . . . . . . . Ctrl+F code

  I- Intro. . . . . . . . . . . . [00001]
  II- Story . . . . . . . . . . . [00002]
  III- Starting . . . . . . . . . [00003]
  IV- Terrains. . . . . . . . . . [00004]
  V- Cities . . . . . . . . . . . [00005]
  VI- Settlers. . . . . . . . . . [00006]
  VII- Governments. . . . . . . . [00007]
  VIII- Money . . . . . . . . . . [00008]
  IX- The War . . . . . . . . . . [00009]
  X- Diplomats. . . . . . . . . . [00010]
  XI- Science . . . . . . . . . . [00011]
  XII- The Spaceship. . . . . . . [00012]
  XIII- The Paths . . . . . . . . [00013]
  XIV- Spoiler-free Ending. . . . [00014]
  XV- Different Versions. . . . . [00015]
  XVI- FAQ. . . . . . . . . . . . [00016]
  XVII- Copyright . . . . . . . . [00017]
  XVIII- Credits. . . . . . . . . [00018]


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  I- Intro                                                            [00001]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are no FAQs or walkthroughs for this version anywhere, and it has its own
pecculiarities, with less bugs comparing to PC version, but some tricky odds. I
decided that since no one did it it's because they get frustrated with so much
things to write again when there is a ton of walkthroughs for PC version
anyway. And I decided this is my kind of thing, to write what others gave up
and threw the towel.

I ran into this game when the times where like "SNES is just RPGs and some
lousy Street Fighter clone fighting games.", and at first I was thinking it was
a weird copy of Simcity, and then I continued playing until easy addiction. No
point discussing this.

I'm Brazilian, so I hope my english is good enough for everyone to understand.

Last, it's a puzzle/strategy game and they are just so amazing.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  II- Story                                                           [00002]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The story isn't too complicated, since you'll get the role of a leader who will
have to spread his civilization through the world and preferably be more
successful than these others civilizations around, that will try to talk to you
in many ways saying that your civilization is a joke, and they would go easily
to war against you, and you're a vermin to them and other degrading stuff that
will lead to you getting mad at them and tearing up peace treaties.
Particularly the romans and the indians will be very disturbing when hating you
in their speach. Gandhi was never this evil in any other game.

Also, you have to protect your civilization from occasional barbarians, famine,
volcanoes, riots, pirates, flooding, sneak attacks, and the worst: time,
because if you get behind your rivals in science, they will be more mean to you
and enter war more often.

When you start a game, this goddess woman will give you the "weapons" to be an
amateur leader, which are the irrigation, which give you food, the roads, which
give you knowledge and trade, and the mines, which help you build everything
faster.

After you get used to the game, just be advised that you'll be playing it from
4.000 BC to 2.100 AD, which looks like a really long time, and ... it is.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  III- Starting                                                       [00003]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When you start a game, you'll first be shown three options.


------------------------------------
Game start? Customize world? Earth??
------------------------------------

This is your first configuration screen for the game, and the three option will
get you different types of worlds. Game Start will generate a random world, but
Customize World will give you new options:

-Land Mass: Large means you'll have bigger continents, bigger islands, and
smaller oceans. Small means smaller land and more ocean. Large is better for a
spaceship quest, since you'll have more places to add cities, and smaller is
better for destroying enemies as early as possible, because there will be less
places to search for them.

-Temperature: Warm means more deserts, and no tundra outside poles. It's
better for everything to find more oasis too, and it's harder to play on tundra
or near the poles, so it's about more expansion (warm), or more challenge
(cool).

-Climate: Arid will get you more deserts too, and more ground areas, but less
oasis in general. And of course Wet gets you more rivers. Arid is better for
destroying enemies early because they'll be weaker than normal when you find
them, and Wet is better for a spaceship quest since you'll get bigger cities
and they mean more score.

-Age: 3million get you a world with more mountains, and 5million will make you
meet a world with more hills. Mountains are harder to deal with, just this.

Pressing B on the config screen will open the option for customize end. 'Yes'
and on to the next options..

Oh, if you choose Earth, you'll play a game with our real planet as the world
map, a Civ version of it, of course. If you studied a little history, you'll
know where you start after choosing your civilization, and you know where to
search for your enemies too. At least for the start that's true. I'll explain
it later on.


--------------------------
Which level of difficulty:
--------------------------

Chieftain- the easiest one, you start with 300 in money, often two advances and
two settlers, barbarians are weakened to 20% of their unit forces, and you have
free advice all the time, unless you turn it off on options. It's easiest to
learn new advances and keep cities happy. Change of government is almost
imediate. Barracks have less costs and famine lowers the cities less.

Warlord- things are still easy, you don't start with money, but get one advance
and often two settlers, barbarians are weakened to 40%, and will always lose to
a phalanx yet. It's still easy to maintain happiness and learn advances, but
cities riot at level 7. Change of government takes around 2 turns.

Prince- the medium difficulty, start with 0 money, have one advance and two
settlers sometimes, barbarians have 60% of their power, which can be
troublesome for phalanxes over time. Learning advances will take longer, and
maintaining happiness will start to be trouble too because the first riot
usually happen at cities level 6. Change of government takes about 3 turns, and
just rarely enemies will get a random wonder on a city.

King- now it's getting hard, you start with no money, have one advance yet but
more often only one settler, barbarians have 80% of their power, so you have to
change your defenses on every city with new advances, which come slowly, and at
cities level 5 you'll already be seeing riots. Change of government usually
takes 4 turns, and it's not uncommon for enemy civilizations to get some of the
wonders before you, probably while you were building it.

Emperor- this is really hard, you start with 0 money, one settler and 1 or 0
advance, having to learn them in a very slow curve, while enemies seems to be
playing on Chieftain and learning it all easily, making you get behind in
science often, and having to protect yourself from barbarians with full power.
Change of government usually takes long 5 turns, your cities will start rioting
at level 4, and you'll barely have a chance to build a wonder, since all
enemies will start getting them randomly and quickly. Barracks cost 4$ in
maintenance, and famine reduces a city in about 30%, often. If you win at this,
you can mark yourself as "conquered it" (at your GameFAQs account).


----------------------------
The number of civilizations:
----------------------------

Options are 3 to 7, if you play with more civilizations, they'll bump into each
other more often, advance less, and more often you'll get messages like "japan
destroyed aztec", or "russia destroyed mongol", the civilizations will be very
random before you actually meet them yourself. I find 7 a better number to
start a despotic conquest, and to build up the spaceship too. 3 is a harder
game since enemies left alone will most of the times advance in science and be
harder to deal with, war or diplomatic. Starters should go with 7, I suppose.


---------------------------------
Which civilization should I pick:
---------------------------------

Pick your favourite. But if you get to see the advantages of each, let's see...
in this version you only get a random start, with one or two knowledges, and 1
or 2 settlers. Some say russians start with 2 settlers, but even this is random
in this verion.

But russians are the best choice to start if you look at the enemy picture..
russians as enemies have the worst AI possible, they are extremely aggressive,
they expand, they often destroy other civilizations, they conquer their
continent, don't take long to figure out navigation and they don't like peace
treaties, prefering to demand tributes. Prefer to start near them so you can
deal with the guys when they're still weak.

When you're playing a World Map game, on the other hand, you get to start on
the same spots the actual civilizations started in the past, which can make
you think of choosing a good starting point. I'd say aztecs and egyptians are
best choices, because you'll have one entire continent to yourself, given you
take good care of the 'corridor', let's say it like this.

Starting knowledges I got by trying out:
Alphabet, Bronze Wrk, Burial, Masonry, Pottery, Riding, The Wheel.

Color: Roman/russian will be cyan, babylonian/japanese will be white,
german/french will be purple, egypcian/aztec will be brown, american/chinese
will be pink, greek/english will be green, indian/mongol will be yellow. It's
impossible to meet two civilizations the same color on the same game, but if
you kill one, the other of the same color will appear, given it's early enough
in the game, which is before year 1.000 AD, I'm guessing. They can appear from
nothing, far away, or near you, after some year they only appear on distant
lands, and on World Map games they don't appear in logical places, I've had to
deal with some greeks on America and found some aztecs on the Great Britain
area once.


-------------------------------------------------
How does time works, 20 years passed in one turn?
-------------------------------------------------

Passage of time changes during the game, you'll be playing in different year
paces, like this:

4.000 BC - 20 BC: 20 years per turn
20 BC - 1 AD: 21 years
1 AD - 20 AD: 19 years
20 AD - 1.000 AD: 20 years
1.000 AD - 1.500 AD: 10 years
1.500 AD - 1.755 AD: 5 years
1.755 AD - 1.851 AD: 2 years
1.851 AD and later: 1 year

So, the game goes on for about 570~650 turns, which is a quest of days, maybe
weeks playing, you should take a rest in the pauses and in between. Only play
one entire game of Civ if you're taking the world, since this way, your turns
will be faster and your enemies will perish sooner, if you end it quickly, it
can go to about 2 hours, ... but a spaceship game going for max score can get
to 100 hours of playing, most people say it's really boring, but I like it
anyway =P

The years you're playing make difference in where new enemies spawn too, see,
even if you play with 7 civilizations, to defeat them all, there are 12 enemy
civilizations. When you defeat the first one, the other with the same color
will appear somewhere. Most of the times in a corner or other continent, but I
had them appear in front of me sometimes, and killed their settler, or a city
size 1 with no defenders. And sometimes you get the message right after you
destroy the greeks, that english was destroyed by someone else.


-----------------------------
What can I do after starting:
-----------------------------

Ok, your settler is there, blinking, and there is a 3x3 square of non darkness.
Now you can access the menus clicking anywhere else with A button.

- Distribute: I recommend this is the first thing you should do. You start with
0.5.5 ... the first number is lux, the second is tax, and the third is science.
I prefer to change it to 0.0.10, but that's just me. If you prefer to raise
money from taxes, go for it. I'd go with lux only after changing to republic,
too.

- Advice: Here you can keep an eye on many of the things happening in your
little world:

--- City Status: all your cities are here, how many food, build and trade
points they are getting, and if you put it to the right, what are they
building shows up too.

--- Military: all your units are shown here. Pressing B, the next screen will
show up with all units you already lost in this game. Oh, and the typo
'Miritary' is here too =P I think it's from japanese..

--- Intelligence: here you can see all your data, the game marks you as
friendly, civilized, aggressive, militaristic, etc, shows your amount of cash
and war units, plus your name, capital, and type of government.

--- Attitude: you get an attitude survey, which shows a bar of happy, normal
and unhappy people by percentage, kind of, and a list of cities and if they
have marketplaces, banks, cathedrals, temples, and colosseums.

--- Trade: this screen shows how many turns you have until the next advance,
how much do you get from taxes, how much you spend on your buildings, and a
list from what you get in food, build and trade from every city. Clicking
'cost' you can see how many of each building you have, with the cost for one of
these on the left.

--- Science: all expertises you have show up here in a list. Plus the one that
is being learn at the moment shows up above, and how much you need in science
to advance. Use it from time to time, the science advtsor, oops, I mean,
advisor. Game typo.

- Revolution: This is the button you press when you want to change your
government. A revolution will take place, some turns will pass and then you can
decide the new government. Don't bother doing this before learning an actual
government from the expertises, though. Or getting the Pyramids.

- Information: More information.

--- Top Five Cities: The top 5 for cities in the current game. It's calculated
1st on how many wonders it has, 2nd on how many happy citizen are living
there, and 3rd how many citizens are living there.

--- Score: you can keep track of your score, but only for a spaceship game.
You'll only know your conqueror score when you kill the last one of enemy
civilizations. Things that matter to the final score for a spaceship game are
1st how many wonder are in your cities, 2nd how much of the spaceship you
build, 3rd how many future techs you learned, and 4th how many turns are you at
peace with your enemies... sum all this to all levels of city size summed up,
and there it is, your score. Dividing by 10 you get your percentage.

--- Demographics: there is a lot here... it shows up in positions, so you know
who is the 1st one in many aspects, but if you're not the 1st, you'll only know
who he/she is if you established an embassy with them.

----- Approval rating: this looks random to me, but it shows how much of the
citizens approve the way you lead them.

----- Population: your total population, of course.

----- GNP: Not sure what this means..

----- Mfg goods: Not sure too..

----- LandArea: your domains of the world.

----- Literacy: how many citizens are cult.

----- Disease: how many citizens have been to the hospital recently, I'm
guessing.

----- Pollution: how much tons of pollution your cities generate.

----- LifeExpecta.: how many years your usual citizen lives.

----- FamilySize: how many children your usual citizens have.

----- Milt.Service: how many years your citizens are soldiers in their lives,
I'm guessing.

----- AnnualIncome: your gain in taxes.

----- Productivity: this looks random to me too, but.. how much you are
producing with your cities (and settlers too, probably).

--- Seven Wonders: There are 21 seven wonders in the game, so I prefer to call
them just wonders. If you forgot where one was, it will show here which city
it was, and if you don't know where it is, there is the 'Jump' menu.

--- Space Ship: If you are building a spaceship, it will show up here, and if
you feel like it's complete enough, launch it. 

- Jump: lost a city? Find it in this list by its name. Forgot the name? ...
well, the list is here, go testing! =P

- World Map: Want to see the entire world on one screen. You almost got it,
there is a little more to the right or left here.

- Option: You can set some things.

--- Instant advice: That's the tutorial messages that come ON on chieftain
mode, you can turn it on for any difficulty, or off, of course.

--- End of turn: The button stops showing up every end of turn if you put it
OFF, which means you can't do final adjustments before letting the enemies
move. I prefer it ON.

--- Animation: You already know what the advances bring you, is getting tired
of seeing all buildings appear in the city? Turn it OFF here.

--- Music: Tired of the musics? Turn them OFF here.

--- Enemy moves: If you turn this OFF, you can see the enemy moves more quickly
and 'teleporting', but still one move per time, not that faster if you ask me,
so I leave it ON too.

- Save: Prefer to save your game every turn, before ending it.

- Retire: You can always quit, and your score can be published, if you have
done enough for the top 5.

Above this menu you always get your name chosen before starting, your current
year, your amount of cash, your lightbulb (the brighter, fewer turns to learn
an expertise), your civilization (if you chose russia it will show up), your
distrbution of trade, and finally your population. When you surpass 100.000,
200.000, 300.000 etc, and then 1.000.000, 2.000.000, and then 10.000.000, I
think you get the point, it will happen all the time anyway.

Press A on your settler to see his command next, if you have more than one, it
will show right below the above menu, on the right. Every time you have more
than one unit on the exact same place, other will show up there and you can
choose them directly pressing A too.


------------------
Tutorial messages:
------------------

*Game start: The first thing you must do is search out suitable locations for
cities, and build the first of them, your capital. Suitable sites are rivers,
plains and coastlines, or at some point near where a particular natural
resource can be exploited.

-Gee, what does that mean? It means what it means. By the way, you can press B
on any spot for its description, but the next section 'Terrains' will give you
even more of this information.


*You found the spot: This site is suitable for the construction of a city. To
build a city, select 'City' from the 'order menu,.

-Comma and period together? I know, a lot of translation issues on the game,
but it also means the game is telling you to build a city right away, where you
are, as it will be a great city in the future. These places are often near
horses, golden bars or forest deers.


*After creating a city: A city serves as a focal point for trade and
information. 'Sages' and 'scientists', people who gather information and are
thus vital to your civilization, create new technologies and culture. Choose an
appropriate field of research from the next menu to be displayed.

-Gee, ...-- Well, these sages and scientist guys will be always researching
ways of doing things easier and valuing resources, and making things that help
out the life, or just give people comfort with better houses, anyway, what
matters here is that you'll be upgrading your units eventually. Personally I
don't think you should be picky on the first advance, since you need them all
to have a good civilization. For my personal style of play, you should pick
'The Wheel', or 'Bronze Wrk'.. or maybe 'Alphabet'. (I'm giving three options
because as I said before level Chieftain often gives you two expertises, so
maybe two of them will already be mastered from game start, then you get the
other).


*Settler in a ground spot near city: At this point 'irrigation' is appropriate.
With irrigation your production of foodstuffs increases, as does the rate of
increase of population of cities.

-All ground spots near water should be irrigated if you have the time to use
the settler for that, but if you're in a hurry to expand and overtake enemies,
you should get going and find a new place for a city. If you irrigate it now,
the tutorial will give you the next message when the settler is done..


*Settler in a grass spot near city: At this point you would probably be best to
build roads. When you build roads, your units will be able to move faster, and
the volume of trade between cities will rise.

-Irrigation is only good on the start if there will be immediate gain on the
numbers, ground irrigated boosts the food points to double, while grass don't.
But grass is already giving you that double, so making it better is building a
road, really.


*Settler climbing a hill near city: At this point you are able to expand your
production of natural resources. The creation of 'mines' increases your
production of natural resources.

-Is he being redundant? Yes. But mining is a good way to improve your building
speed and construct things faster, it's a good way to go for building wonders
early up in the game, too. Colossus comes to mind.


*Your first militia: You have just acquired your first military unit. Try to
move the unit and to give it particular orders. Military units can be used to
'explore', 'expand territory', 'attack', 'defend', and to perform other tasks.

-I think he means you should defend your first city, because if there is no one
to do it, and an enemy unit finds your city, he will take it and there will be
no audience with the king, they all take opportunities, and only talk to you if
they find one of your units.


*Usually after the second city: Cities can be protected from bandits and enemy
attacks by defense units of high defensive capability stationed in cities in
the 'defense mode'. Just as 'SETTLERS' can be used to construct roads,
irrigated regions and mines, they can also build new cities. To attack an
enemy, use units with a high attack capability like MILITIA, ARMOR, or
CATAPULT.

-Come again? No, he does not mean militia, or armors that will be given to you
after a long list of learnable expertises, actually he meant chariots, all the
way chariots.


*Basic Strategy: 1
Cities should be defended by at least one (preferably two) military units of
high defense capability. A balance should be kept between the speed with new
cities are built and old ones developed. Beware of territorial expansion
without adequate defense capability. Enemy military units or bandits will
attack without warning.

-Gee, is that true? Yes, I'm afraid so, sneak attacks are common, and you will
never be able to negociate with bandits, but he's blabbbering a little, if you
have a peace treaty with another civilization, they'll hesitate a lot before
attacking, so if one of your cities is being surrounded, build up a chariot to
sneak attack first. Or maybe a catapult, since the best defense is a good
offense.


*Basic Strategy: 2
Be at peace with stronger powers, and subjulgate weaker ones as soon as they
achieve independence. Consider changing the system of government to 'monarchy'
once the number of cities passes six or perhaps seven. When a civilization
reaches a certain level, send 'SPY' and build embassies so as to be swiftly in
possession of information on that nation. Also use 'CARAVAN' to develop trade.

-Well? He is partially right, but if your strategy is to conquer the world as
quick as you can, don't bother other governments or caravans, only trade
chariot and catapult strikes for blood. If you're sending a diplomat, be
careful with his positioning, enemies love to sneak attack him.


*Monarchy: You have now acquired the expertise for 'monarchy'. When you change
your government to monarchy, the rate of production of your urban population
rises, but so does the cost of maintaining each military unit. To change
government, a 'revolution' must first take place. 'Revolution' is on the Game
Menu.

-Well? I personally think monarchy is a waste of time and trade, don't change
to it, prefer republic, it gives much more to you.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  IV- Terrains                                                        [00004]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When you start actually playing the game, you won't see much, because in the
start, you don't know what's out there. There are all these black clouds to
keep you from seeing the world, and your mission is to unveil it. Start moving
your first unit, the settler, and you'll see more, which means less of the
darkness is there. Diagonal moves are often better when unveiling your world.

Ok, you'll preferably build a city in the first turn, but if you don't, there
is a chance you might find a better spot for your capital. Don't worry about
"capital" itself, you can change your capital by building a palace where you
want the capital to be. When you do it, the former palace will cease to exist.
Be sure to move your first unit around a little, to unveil all city spots as
soon as possible, then make it defend. You might get to find a village this way
too.

So, terrains. Terrains are all those spaces where your units are able to move
at. These are all the possibilities: grass, river, ground, desert, forest,
jungle, swamp, hills, mountains, tundra, arctic and ocean. And now, how to use
each one.


------
Grass:
------

Food gain: 2 on despotism/anarchy, 3 on other governments (after irrigating)
Build gain: none, but shield spots are worth 1
Trade gain: none, but with roads, it's 2 on republic/democracy, and 1 on other
governments
Move cost: 1
Defense: +0%

Usually your most common terrain. It's good for your cities to have some of
these around, because in the very beggining, they will provide you food points
that will make your city grow without the need of irrigation.

Can I turn it into something else? Yes, grass has some settler possibilities:
- Forest: whether it's worth it, it will be up to you. Forest is more build,
grass is more food. Costs 15 turns to do this.
- Irrigation: later on in the game, you'll earn more than 2 food points, these
grass spots are worth 4 food points, actually. But in the beginning, prefer to
irrigate ground spots. Cost in time is 5 turns.
- Road: building a road makes you move your units 3 times faster, and it
accelerates science, which is a must, in all stages of a game. It's fast to do,
costs only 2 turns.
- Railroad: After building a road, it's even better to build railroads, it
costs 4 turns to build it, but it multiplies your gain by 1.5. If you were
gaining 2 food points, now it's 3. If it was 3, it will be 4. Only integer
numbers..

Maximum usage: An ideal grass spot will give you 4 food, 1 build and 2 trade
points.


------
River:
------

Food gain: 2 on despotism/anarchy, 3 on other governments (after irrigating)
Build gain: none, but curve spots are worth 1
Trade gain: only 1, but with roads, it's 2 on republic/democracy, and 1 on
other governments
Move cost: 1
Defense: +50%

These too are good spots to have around, especially in the beginning, where you
don't have to irrigate it to be gaining 2 food points. The only bad about them
is you need the expertise of bridging before you start to build roads over
them. And they're good for war too, since the protection is +50%. A good hint:
You can't build roads over rivers from the start, but you can build cities,
they can be your roads.

Can I turn it into something else? Not really, but you can improve it:
- Irrigation: later on in the game, you'll earn more than 2 food points, these
river spots are worth 4 food points, actually. But in the beginning, prefer to
irrigate ground spots. Cost in time is 5 turns.
- Road: building a road makes you move your units 3 times faster, and it
accelerates trade, which is a must, in all stages of a game. It's fast to do,
costs only 2 turns, but for rivers you'll need to know bridging.
- Railroad: After building a road, it's even better to build railroads, it
costs 4 turns to build it, but it multiplies your gain by 1.5. If you were
gaining 2 food points, now it's 3. If it was 3, it will be 4. Only integer
numbers..

Maximum usage: An ideal river spot will give you 4 food, 1 build and 2 trade
points.


-------
Ground:
-------

Food gain: 1, raises to 2 with irrigation
Build gain: 1, and on horses, 3
Trade gain: none, but with roads, it's 2 on republic/democracy, and 1 on other
governments
Move cost: 1
Defense: +0%

Ground is not as good as grass when it comes to "later in the game", but at the
start, it's good because it's easy to irrigate it so the food gain is the same,
and you can actually build things faster using ground spots.

Can I turn it into something else? Yes, ground can be modified by settler
units:
- Forest: whether it's worth it, it will be up to you. Forest is more build,
ground is more food. Costs 15 turns to do this.
- Irrigation: later on in the game, you'll earn more than 2 food points, the
grass spots are worth 4 food points, actually. But in the beginning, prefer to
irrigate ground spots. Cost in time is 5 turns.
- Road: building a road makes you move your units 3 times faster, and it
accelerates science, which is a must, in all stages of a game. It's fast to do,
costs only 2 turns.
- Railroad: After building a road, it's even better to build railroads, it
costs 4 turns to build it, but it multiplies your gain by 1.5. If you were
gaining 2 food points, now it's 3. If it was 3, it will be 4. Only integer
numbers..

Maximum usage: An ideal ground spot will give you 3 food, 4 build and 2 trade
points.


-------
Desert:
-------

Food gain: 0,... 1 if you irrigate it. Oasis is worth 2 food points from the
start, 3 with irrigation and make it 4 with railroad, and still raises to 6
when you get to change government, which makes it the best spot for city
growing.
Build gain: 1, 2 if ou mine it, 3 suming up a railroad.
Trade gain: none, but with roads, it's 2 on republic/democracy, and 1 on other
governments
Move cost: 1
Defense: +0%

These spots are not friendly at the beginning, and they won't get much better
later. Most people prefer to mine these, but for me, especially when it comes
to big continents, irrigate them all the way, so you can get water to all the
hard-to-reach places, without 

Can I turn it into something else? Not really, but you can improve it:
- Irrigation: prefer to go with irrigation at start, because if there is a
ground or grass spots nearby, it will be easier to reach it for irrigation too.
Costs 5 turns.
- Mining: makes it a better building spot, adding 1. It adds 2 if you get it to
a railroad. 5 turns to happen too. Not hard to be changing them all the time.
- Road: building a road makes you move your units 3 times faster, and it
accelerates science, which is a must, in all stages of a game. It's fast to do,
costs only 2 turns.
- Railroad: After building a road, it's even better to build railroads, it
costs 4 turns to build it, but it multiplies your gain by 1.5. If you were
gaining 2 food points, now it's 3. If it was 3, it will be 4. Only integer
numbers..

Maximum usage: An ideal desert spot will give you 6 food, 1 build and 2 trade
points. There is an alternative of mining which will change this to 3 food, 3
build and 2 trade points.


-------
Forest:
-------

Food gain: 1, but deer spots are worth 2 on despotism/anarchy, 3 on other
governments, and get to 4 with these and railroad
Build gain: 2 (3 with railroad)
Trade gain: 0
Move cost: 2
Defense: +50%

Your main build spots at any game start, if you're not lucky enough to find
the oil drops on swamps. They certainly hinder your city raising, but
sometimes you'll need faster building of units, and it's good to prevent
quick grow when you're avoiding riots.

Can I turn it into something else? Yes, forest can be modified:
Ground: costs only 5 turns to turn these into better trade spots, but for
better food gain you'll need more 5 turns to irrigate it..
Road: not much gain, roads alone don't change any values.. costs 4 turns.
Railroad: makes forest spots evolve from 2 to 3 build points. Costs 8 turns,
but it's worth the time, I swear to you.

Maximum usage: An ideal forest spot is worth 4 food and 3 build points.


-------
Jungle:
-------

Food gain: 1
Build gain: 0
Trade gain: usually none, but pearl spots are worth 3 or 4 points, 5 with
democracy/republic and a road. Make it a railroad, and it's 7 points
Move cost: 2
Defense: +50%

These are bad to have a lot around especially at the beginning.. they don't
provide enough of anything except the pearl with its trade points. Actually,
you can accelerate the first 3 or 4 expertises to incredibly fast with a
pearl. Don't be afraid to turn the common jungle spots to grass in the
future.

Can I turn it into something else? Yes, jungle can be modified:
Grass: 15 turns. And after that irrigation on the same spot is 10 turns. Long
time waiting for that, but you can get a level 28 city with 2 or 3 of these
procedures, so consider doing it later on.
Road: costs 4 turns to put roads in jungles.. prefer to do this just for
pearls.
Railroad: 8 more turns waiting for the railroad, again, it's only worth for
pearls.

Maximum usage: At best, you'll get 1 food and 7 trade points of these.


------
Swamp:
------

Food gain: 1
Build gain: 0, but oil drops are worth 4 points, 6 with railroad.
Trade gain: 0
Move cost: 2
Defense: +50%

Can I turn it into something else? Yes, swamp can be modified:
Grass: 15 turns. And after that irrigation on the same spot is 10 turns. Long
time waiting for that, but you can get a level 28 city with 2 or 3 of these
procedures, so consider doing it early.
Road: costs 4 turns to pass roads in swamps.. prefer to do this just for oil
drops.
Railroad: 8 more turns waiting for the railroad, it's only worth for oil drops.
Really.

Maximum usage: An ideal swamp spot will give you 1 food and 6 build points.


------
Hills:
------

Food gain: usually 1, but 2 with irrigation, 3 with this and railroad
Build gain: 0, 2 on coal spots, +2 or 3 for mining it, and railroad make it a
really strong building spot.
Trade gain: 0
Move cost: 2
Defense: +100%

These are not really good spots at the beginning, but they provide good gain
later, and coal spots can be used exactly like forests, but with better build
gain. I prefer to mine only the coal and irrigate all the others.

Can I turn it into something else? Not really, but you can improve it:
Mine: takes 10 turns to build, sincerely I prefer to do it only for spots near
cities that build things too slow.
Irrigation: takes 10 turns too, the spot gives 3 food at best, but no trade.
Road: 4 turns to do it. They don't get you trade points, but they get much
easier to move around.
Railroad: 8 turns. Again, no trade and even easier to move.

Maximum usage: Hills spots are worth 1 food, and 7 build points. An
alternative to these is change them to irrigation and they'll provide 3 food
points, and 3 build points.


----------
Mountains:
----------

Food gain: 0
Build gain: 1, 2 with mining and 3 suming up a railroad.
Trade gain: usually 0, but a gold bar is worth 5 6 or 7 of these, and make it 7
9 or 10 with a railroad, very useful for learning expertises.
Move cost: 3 (avoid it with lcavs and chariots if possible)
Defense: +200% (put a phalanx there and he is nearly invincible early on)

Avoid mountains at all costs before 1.000 BC, and before you have the time to
mine it properly, wait for the railroads. Use only the gold bars, like the
jungle pearls, these are worth a good boost on science, just a little worse on
the food gain for the city..

Can I turn it into something else? Not really, but you can improve it:
Mine: 10 turns to do it, I'd only bother for gold bars, really.
Road: 6 turns. Prefer to do it only for gold bars too, since it takes too long.
But, if you get a place with a lot of these combined, consider going through
it.
Railroad: 12 turns. Build it after roads, only for gold bars, like above.

Maximum usage: Ideal mountains give you 3 build and 10 trade points.


-------
Tundra:
-------

Food gain: 1, 2 or 3 on a reindeer and 4 with railroad and ideal government.
Build gain: 0
Trade gain: 0
Move cost: 1
Defense: +0%

Tundra is bad. If you want it to not exist since the beginning, choose to play
warm maps. But if you happen to find these near the poles, and there are good
spots near it, I don't see why it couldn't be a decent city.

Can I turn it into something else? No.
Road: 4 turns. Only worth for reindeers.
Railroad: 8 turns. Again, reindeers only.

Maximum usage: Only the 4 reindeer food points.


-------
Arctic:
-------

Food gain: 0, 2 if there is a sealion.
Build gain: 0
Trade gain: 0
Move cost: 2
Defense: +0%

You only see these on the deepest of poles, so there isn't much to talk here.
Don't go near them, and don't walk on them.

Can I turn it into something else? No.
Road: 4 turns. Actually, don't do it, you'll only find these on north and south
pole anyway.
Railroad: 8 turns. Not worth it.

Maximum usage: Only the 3 seal food points.


------
Ocean:
------

Food gain: 1, 2 on fishes, and 3 on fishes and republic/democracy
Build points: 0
Trade points: 2, and become 3 on republic/democracy
Move cost: 1, but only water units can move in it.
Defense: +0%

Later in the game, you'll see ocean spots as very good for trade gain. At the
beginning, they just happen to hinder war progress, so start building your
beach cities after you get good navigation units only.

Can I turn it into something else? No.

Maximum usage? Don't stay on despotism/anarchy...


--------------------------------
Cities built in different spots:
--------------------------------
Well, the spot you build a city in will make different cities:
- Grass and river: Will start growing ok but producing slowly
- Ground: Growing ok and producing a little faster than grass
- Desert: Will have serious trouble with food and growing
- Forest: Will grow slowly and produce faster
- Mountains: Worst growth but good production
- Jungle, swamp, hills, tundra, arctic: Slow growth and production
- Ocean...? Not possible

But:
- Grass with shield: Good growing and decent production
- River with curve: Same as above
- Ground with horse: Good growing and great production
- Desert with oasis: Great growing and decent production
- Forest with deer: Great growing and production
- Jungle with pearl: Grow slowly and give science quicker
- Swamp with oil drop: Grow slowly and producing very fast
- Hills with coal: Grow ok without the production
- Mountain with gold: Worst growth and great production of trade and science
- Reindeer, seal? Ok growth and no production


---------
Villages:
---------

In the map, you'll sometimes find a gray house, which is a village. These are
all the possibilities when your unit walks into this spot:

- Accepting our rule: You create a new town from it. It's my favorite outcome,
since you don't need a settler, and you gain a new base for new strategies. It
is even better if this happens on an island, which means the place is all yours
now. Cities will be explained in the next section.

- Scrolls containing wisdom: You get a new advance. It will be always one you
can learn, it's my second favorite outcome, but it can get you the same one you
where learning, and this kind of makes you lose these turns without learning.

- Skilled mercenaries: You get an extra unit, it can be a lcav or a legion.
These are good for exploration of the map, and are NONE, which means they don't
belong to any city, so they won't abandon you because of a weak moment from any
city.

- They give precious metals: You get 50$ in money, it's not bad, just it feels
like they were a little cheap, since you'll probably have much more than this.
Still, it's acceptable.

- The clan were bandits: You get surrounded by barbarian units. This is the
worst outcome, but there is always something good from this, as if you win the
battle, your unit will most certainly be a veteran afterwards.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  V- Cities                                                           [00005]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

That's something you'll most probably already have on the first turn. Cities
are your bases for everything, they have your people, your war units, your
non-war units, your gain on the terrains, and your building, of course. About
the terrain, all cities will have 21 spots on its area, which are the 20 around
it, and the center.

Cities have levels, they start at 1, they need 20 food points to grow to level
2, 30 to level 3, 40 to level 4, and so on. Prefer to build your cities on good
spots, like deers, oasis and horses. When you start a city, you'll lose the
settler unit that did it, it's as in 'they settled'.

But the danger lies in letting cities grow too fast. At beginning you should
let them grow only until they riot for the first time. Keep in mind the level
it rioted, and keep all other cities from growing to this level, all of them
should be one level below it. Depends on the difficulty level. Don't worry
about the enemy too much, any city can build units, as long as you have the
right advances and enough build spots around, which can be substituted by
money. And remember to have a city connected to the ocean or else you can't
produce ocean units or go to other continents.

When you first build any city, you have to decide what the citizen of the city
will work for building, which should be:
- First, the defense, your best defensive unit, will be the militia at the
start, so learn "Bronze Wrk" to get the phalanxes soon.
- Second, a barrack, for making veteran units, barracks have no cost at the
start, and you can sell them for 40$ anytime.
- Third, a chariot, if you already have 'The Wheel'. You have to explore the
land the most you can, find out the size of your continent, find the enemy
civilizations, and depending on their strength, you can overtake some new
cities from them, or destroy them, depends on the strategy.
- and Fourth, a settler, the city being at level 3, spread, spread like a
virus, be expansive, count 3 or 4 spaces and make a new city, repeating the
process until you don't know where are some of the cities anymore.

The strategy doesn't vary much for the start, as you have to make good use of
scientists and put all the trade points on them, so the more cities you have,
more quickly new expertises will come, and the advance will be faster. And the
more you spread, more villages you find, more good things will happen to your
units, like getting skilled mercenaries, scrolls with new expertises and even
new cities can be born from the villages.


-----------------
Menus for cities:
-----------------

You get these options when clicking at the city menu:

- City: This shows which spots of terrain are being used by the city, you can
change it whenever you want, and it shows when a city will level up, how much
you get from trade points, and a granary is shown on the left if you have one.
You have to click the spot being used to stop using it, and click then on one
you want to use. Test it a lot. Down there you get the results in food, build
and trade points. In this menu, if there are people to spare, you can put them
to do other jobs, like entertainer (Elvis), tax collector, and scientist.

- Production: This shows what's being produced on the city, it can be a unit,
a building, or a wonder, all cities are always producing something, and don't
let this phrase be false, watch out for cities that have a barrack and are
producing a barrack, maybe they are stuck, sell the item to make it produce
again. This menu also shows an 'advice' button, you can use it to build what
people from this city wants, but remember that you are their leader and you
know what's best for them more than them :)

- Armed forces: Here, all units inside this city will be shown. All defensive
units, all sentry units, and all waiting-to-move units. Here the difference in
defense and sentry will show up if you build a transport or sail, if the ocean
unit can carry other units, and they are in sentry mode, they'll all tag along
and hop in together on the same boat. 

- View: This shows the animation of your city. Some houses, buildings, all the
city has constructed, the citizes for the city level (entertainer really look
like an Elvis here), and ... really, not much to be seen that you could not see
on the 'City' and 'Production' menus.. you can even turn off the animations on
options.

- Happy: This will show the impact of some buildings over your citizens from
this city. With this feature, you can know how much a cathedral, colosseum or
temple are giving happiness to the citizens, how some wonders affect the city,
and of course, how lux points affect them too.

- Rename: You can rename any city that is yours, the best in this is that you
can rename them so that you'll remember better where the city is.


---------------
Civil disorder:
---------------

What? The music changed to dispair! That means your city is currently under
civil disorder, you have to go to the 'City' menu to make someone an Elvis to
entertain the sad citizen. If a city keeps entering civil disorder, corruption
can take it over and it will become an enemy city, depending on how well the
enemies are, it will most probably be your worst enemy anyway. The main idea
here is to balance the happiness, anyway. A city with more unhappy than happy
will enter civil disorder. It's up to you avoiding it.

Sometimes you'll notice that ugly face that shows up in a civil disorder over
your city,.. it shows up on enemy cities as well, if the face shows up when
you're destroying the defenses of this city, the enemy most probably is under
despotism. If it shows up when you gather troops around but is not attacking,
it's most probable that they are under monarchy. That's not completely tested
yet, but makes sense, since on despotism, a city with no defenders can get an
unhappy person at low levels.


----------------------
Thanksgiving festival:
----------------------

And now what? The music changed to a happy fanfare! Oh, that means a
thanksgiving festival is taking place. It only shows up if at least half of the
citizens are happy and none are unhappy. They'll be explained here in this
section, as they are the key to extreme city growing.

When you are on Democracy/Republic, and a city gets a thanksgiving festival,
what will happen is that this city will start levelling up its size on every
turn of the game. It only stops when the city doesn't have food points to stock
food, or if less than half citizens are happy, of course. But really, if a city
is using 57 or more food points, the festival never stops! If famine or
flooding hits this city, it will all grow back in a few turns. Cities can grow
this way to level 28, which is the max level as you know.

Getting half of the citizens happy is not that easy, but it's not that hard
either. What you need is a good amount of trade points, and lux of at least
30%. But if you raise up your lux to 100% (distribution 10.0.0) for a few
turns, nearly all cities join the Thanksgiving Festival, and they grow fast
enough to sometimes surpass numbers, like showing 'America has 10.000.000
people', and in the next turn show up 'America has 30.000.000 people'.. this
trick is called President Day Sale on most FAQs, but I really think this name
isn't fitting in the passage of years, days are irrelevant if 5 years pass in
seconds.


---------------
City disasters:
---------------

After a turn ends, there are some disasters, natural random disasters that can
hinder your progress just a little, or maybe a lot, depending on what happens:

- Under attack by pirates: If a city gets this, it loses all food and build
points, so, the construction will have to be restarted, and the city grow will
take much more time, especially if you were using a granary to go faster. You
can completely prevent this disaster by having a barrack built in the city.

- Volcano: Can happen to any city that doesn't have a temple, and it destroys
another building, if it gets your cathedral, for example, it's a possible riot.
You can rebuild it spending money or making the city rebuild it the slow way,
if you believe there is time for it. Volcanoes never happen if a city has no
building.

- Earthquake: This cannot be avoided, but it's rare too, the same effect of a
volcano, destroy one building, and after that, you can rebuild it. It never
happens on no building cities too.

- Massive fire: Fire can destroy buildings too, but it will never happen on a
city with aqueduct. Or again, cities without buildings never get massive fire.

- Plague: This disaster takes down some of the city population, as it usually
happens with cities less than level size 10, it often means no problem. An
aqueduct is needed to prevent it.

- Flooding: If a city gets this, it loses population, or I could say, it's a
level decrease. It can be avoided by having city walls, but really, cities
grow fast and flooding is rare.
- Famine: This makes a city lose more population than a flooding, and it can
be avoided by having a granary. On emperor difficulty level, famine reduces
1/3 of a city population.



- / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / -

Here are all the improvements you can build at a city. Units will be treated in
another section, later, called The War.

-------
Palace:
-------

Cost to build: 200 resources
Maintenance: 0 resources
Sell it for: 200$
Since: Masonry
Text: The administrative center of your civilization. Distant cities are prone
to corruption.

This is your main control center. A city with a palace has 0 corruption, and
will always be your capital. You can change capital by building a palace, or by
selling your palace and simply starting another city. But really, most of my
games have the same capital all the time, so it's not necessary to change your
capital.


--------
Barrack:
--------

Cost to build: 40 resources
Maintenance: 0 at start, 1 after getting Gunpowder, 2 after Combustion
Sell it for: 40$
Since: game start
Text: All units in cities become veterans. Maintenance costs rise with new
technology and military units.

This is a construction that will let you build units that are veterans. What is
a veteran unit? It's a unit with 50% more attack and defense, so it's good. But
later in the game you won't need much fighting if you are the most advanced,
and the other players of Civ will tell you too that barracks are more worth
selling them all the time to raise your money. It's even better than caravans
and city exchanges..


--------
Granary:
--------

Cost to build: 60 resources
Maintenance: 1 resource
Sell it for: 60$
Since: Pottery
Text: 50% of stored food can be used after a population increase. Also protects
population from starving.

Remember when I told you cities need 20 food points to level up to 2, 30 to 3,
40 to 4 and so on? With a granary built, you'll only need half of these food
points. Good for the beginning, if you have enough money to maintain them (1$
per turn), which is easy to obtain by selling barracks. But after the advent of
"Thanksgiving festival", these become more and more useless. They protect
against famine, which is just a random thing that doesn't really bother you.


-------
Temple:
-------

Cost to build: 40 resources
Maintenance: 1 resource
Sell it for: 40$
Since: Burial
Text: 1 unhappy person becomes satisfied. Also protects against the disaster
'volcano'.

A temple means a happier citizen, which means a happier city. You can raise up
the standards for city size at the beginning in all cities with this. Later on
you'll have better buildings for this task, but build it anyway, less unhappy
citizens means more score, always.


---------
Marktplc:
---------

Cost to build: 80 resources
Maintenance: 1 resource
Sell it for: 80$
Since: Currency
Text: Tax income and luxury goods production increase by 50%.

This is the marketplace, the way to happiness for consumers on your city. It
will often make citizen happy (blue), without the need of an Elvis, and it's
one of the key buildings to a high level city produce more lux and more tax.


--------
Library:
--------

Cost to build: 80 resources
Maintenance: 1 resource
Sell it for: 80$
Since: Writing
Text: Intellectual production increases by 50%.

Libraries are good to have on cities with good trade flow. More than 4?
Build one, the maintenance is low and the science will move faster.


-----------
Courthouse:
-----------

Cost to build: 80 resources
Maintenance: 1 resource
Sell it for: 80$
Since: Laws
Text: Corruption in the cities falls by 50%.

Your cities farther from the capital are rioting in lower levels than you
expected? Build a courthouse, and they will get normal again, sometimes
even happy. Personally I think in the end of a spaceship game, all cities
should have a courthouse, it's more happiness, which is more score.


----------
City Wall:
----------

Cost to build: 120 resources
Maintenance: 2 resources
Sell it for: 120$
Since: Masonry
Text: Defense factor increased by 3 times. Also protection against 'flood'.

Enemies attack your cities and their level go down? They won't go down in a
city with walls. Actually, I don't mind having no city walls in my cities,
since the cost of maintenance can get you poor, so use them only at cities
near a war.


-----
Bank:
-----

Cost to build: 120 resources
Maintenance: 3 resources
Sell it for: 120$
Since: Banking
Text: Tax income and luxury goods production increase by 50%.

This is available to build only if you build first a marketplace. And don't
sell the marketplace either, these are other 50%, which means about 225% of
trade being used for lux and tax. Of course it's wanted on cities you want
well developed. And their maintenance cost is easily paid since the taxes
will give you more money.


-----------
University:
-----------

Cost to build: 160 resources
Maintenance: 3 resources
Sell it for: 160$
Since: University
Text: Intellectual production increases by 50%.

This is available to build only if you build first a Library. And don't
you sell these libraries, the boost is much better with both, which is
around 225% of better advancing with science.


---------
Aqueduct:
---------

Cost to build: 120 resources
Maintenance: 2 resources
Sell it for: 120$
Since: Construct
Text: Cities without aqueducts cannot expand beyond 10 in population.
Protection from 'fire' & 'epidemic'.

I'll tell you this in an experience way. One time, I decided to build
aqueducts only after cities started getting to level 10. This was a terrible
idea, more and more cities started giving messages "Aqueducts are needed for
this city to increase." to avoid this problem, build aqueducts around level
6 or 7, or at least start their constructions earlier. I mean, you want your
cities to be bigger and happier, right? This is a really important building.
And don't sell them after level 10, they are needed for all level ups, 11,
12, 13, and so on until 28.


----------
Cathedral:
----------

Cost to build: 160 resources
Maintenance: 3 resources
Sell it for: 160$
Since: Religion
Text: 4 unhappy people become happy. This helps protect large cities against
riots.

The hardest difficulty you choose, the more importance cathedrals have on
your game. If a city starts rioting on level 5, and you build a cathedral for
it, now this city can grow to level 9. Depending on the lux you choose, they
can go much bigger with no problem. So, cathedrals are a must have.


-----------
Mass Trans:
-----------

Cost to build: 160 resources
Maintenance: 4 resources
Sell it for: 160$
Since: Mass prod
Text: The population is unaffected by pollution.

Only build this for cities after level 20 or so. Or if they produce too much
pollution. In my games I build them after all other improvements to avoid all
pollution, but cities near the ocean won't need it, most of the times. This
reduces about 16 tons of pollution, in general, if a city gets more, a
'Recycle c.' will have to take place.


----------
Colosseum:
----------

Cost to build: 100 resources
Maintenance: 4 resources
Sell it for: 100$
Since: Construct
Text: 3 unhappy people become happy. This helps protect large cities against
riots.

This is an alternative for cathedrals, if you get both, you can grow your city
by 7 levels with no problem. It's the only solution for Emperor games, even. A
city has to have a colosseum eventually. I would get the cathedrals first
because they have bigger effect and less maintenance cost. But put these on
your cities too.


--------
Factory:
--------

Cost to build: 200 resources
Maintenance: 4 resources
Sell it for: 200$
Since: Industrial
Text: Cities' production increases 50%. 'Industrial plant' will nullify it, and
operations cease.

I would only mind building a factory for extreme purposes, like building later
wonders and spaceship parts. But after that, the 'Manufac. P' will always mean
better build gain. And a factory produces more pollution.


-----------
Manufac. P:
-----------

Cost to build: 320 resources
Maintenance: 6 resources
Sell it for: 320$
Since: Robotics
Text: Cities' production increases 100%.

With these, I build my spaceships in games. Double production, in the better
cities (3 better, usually), get you the hardest longest parts in 6 or 7 turns.
And they make better selling buildings in the end, much better than barracks,
since you'll acctually see the years pass even in long settler moving turns.
After a city has all improvements you need, let them build and sell this one.


----------
SDI Dfnse:
----------

Cost to build: 200 resources
Maintenance: 4 resources
Sell it for: 200$
Since: Supr Cndct
Text: Cities are protected from nuclear missile units; attack with these
weapons have no effect.

I don't think you'll ever need one of this. It's an alternative for 'Your
selling item for money", though. If you engage in a nuclear war, consider
putting one of these on your capital.


-----------
Recycle C.:
-----------

Cost to build: 200 resources
Maintenance: 2 resources
Sell it for: 200$
Since: Solar
Text: The probability of pollution drops by 2/3.

Build this only if the mass trans didn't reduce all of the pollution. It's
more powerful for pollution control, and the maintenance is easy to pay. It's
rare that a city will really need it, anyway.


----------
Pwr Plant:
----------

Cost to build: 160 resources
Maintenance: 4 resources
Sell it for: 160$
Since: Refining
Text: Production from factories and industrial plants increases 50%; pollution
decreases.

This is available to build only if you build first a Factory. Well, here is
your 225% for build points. A city with both will produce incredibly fast, you
get barracks every turn, and mech infs too. Personally, I won't need it when I
finally get to this point of the game, and if a city builds things every turn,
the game will start to get really slower. And don't build this on the continent
you put your Hoover dam, it's redundant.


----------
Hydro Pwr:
----------

Cost to build: 240 resources
Maintenance: 4 resources
Sell it for: 240$
Since: Television
Text: Production from factories and industrial plants increases 100%; pollution
decreases.

This is an alternative for factories, and it's as good as a 'Manufac P'. If I'm
not mistaken, you can only put these on near-river-or-ocean cities.


---------
Nuke Pwr:
---------

Cost to build: 160 resources
Maintenance: 2 resources
Sell it for: 160$
Since: Nuclear
Text: 50% production increase from factories / industrial plants. Less
pollution. Riots may cause meltdown.

Only have one of this after learning 'Fusion'. Although I never got a
meltdown before, it's probably not a good thing for pollution and city
level.


- / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / - / -

And now, the wonders:

--------
Pyramid:
--------

Cost to build: 300 resources
Since: Masonry
Text: Type of government changes without passing through 'anarchy'. 'Communism'
cancels effect.

This is a good wonder because you can change to any government with it,
including the ones not mastered yet, so you don't need to learn communism, you
can change to it with the pyramids. The best use of it is to change to
democracy/republic and some turns after this, learn communism =P if you're
going to republic, you'll only need the change once, believe me.


----------
B. Garden:
----------

Cost to build: 300 resources
Since: Pottery
Text: Happiness increases by 1 in each city. 'Invention' cancels effect.

I happen to believe this is a very short time for a wonder, since 'Invention'
is something I pursue from the start, wanting my railoads as soon as possible.
But if you can wait, build this early, and some happiness will happen on your
cities.


---------
Colossus:
---------

Cost to build: 200 resources
Since: Bronze Wrk
Text: Trade in cities increases by 1. 'Electrical Science' cancels effect.

The best one to start, the increased trade will accelerate the advances and if
you happen to change strategy with distribution, this will give more lux and
more tax too, but I prefer to use it for expertise boosting.


-----------
Lighthouse:
-----------

Cost to build: 200 resources
Since: Map Making
Text: All ship movement increased by 1 square. 'Magnetism' cancels effect.

'Magnetism' means 'Compass', silly translation. Well, compass is an early
enough advance to make this a very short span wonder, and the Expedition is so
close and so ... limitless. Only bother doing this for scoring and too-early
trireme exploration.


----------
Great Lib:
----------

Cost to build: 300 resources
Since: Literacy
Text: You gain any expertise developed by 2 other civilizations. 'University'
cancels effect.

I'll be honest here, I never gained these expertises from 2 other
civilizations.. maybe it's broken. Maybe I'm advancing too fast, I don't know
how to use this wonder. It sounds good, though. In a 3 civilization game, this
would give ou evertything they learn until someone learn 'University'... which
is soon enough to blew things up.


-------
Oracle:
-------

Cost to build: 300 resources
Since: Mysticism
Text: 'Mysticism' increases the effect of 'temples.' 'Religion' cancels effect.

Religion comes so quick in the expertise menu that I never had a chance to use
the Oracle.. but as I only build temples after changing government, and I only
change government after getting 'Industrial' and 'Mass Prod', which are often
much later than 'Religion',... I just don't see the point of a wonder that
expires so soon.


-----------
Great Wall:
-----------

Cost to build: 300 resources
Since: Masonry
Text: Interchange with other civilizations always brings offer of peace.
'Gunpowder' cancels effect.

This is a good thing to have if you happen to fall behind in science, and if
you are an evil treaty tearer too. Gunpowder can be hindered as much as it's
your only option to learn it, and if the enemies get it first, you don't have
that much trouble learning it from them, it's only a problem if you really fall
behind in science..


-----------
Expedition:
-----------

Cost to build: 400 resources
Since: Navigation
Text: All ships movement increases by 1 square.

You have to have this, not just because there isn't a glitch to move
infinitely, but because if your enemies get it, they become annoying and the
end of turn transition becomes much slower.. just build it in a far away city
on your main continent, good hills around, and not that far from the capital.


----------
M. Chapel:
----------

Cost to build: 300 resources
Since: Religion
Text: Increases the effect of 'churches' until the development of communism.

If you plan to use the churches early on, this is a good wonder to have
in early times, and since you're probably holding to learn communism because of
the Pyramids too, it can come in handy.


----------
C. Observ:
----------

Cost to build: 300 resources
Since: Astronomy
Text: Coordination of 'library', 'university', and 'scientists' doubles
intellectual production.

It doubles intellectual production, I mean, you have to advance faster than
your enemies, that's the kind of thing that will help out a lot, and it never
expires, so, save a good producing city to learn this around 500-1.000 AD =P


-----------
S. Theater:
-----------

Cost to build: 400 resources
Since: Medicine
Text: Unhappy people in cities become content. However, hinders the development
of 'Electrical Science.'

Another of the good wonders to have, but it expires soon enough, and will be
joined by the Colossus, they both expire on the same turn, not that you won't
have some other ways to compensate at this point. Remember, even if wonders
expire, they already opened the way to more advancing.


-----------
N. College:
-----------

Cost to build: 400 resources
Since: Gravity
Text: Intellectual production in all 'libraries' and 'universities' increases.

This is one of the first non-cancelling wonders you can get. Getting it early
will most probably make it advance much quicker than any other civilization you
could be possibly fighting, so, it's a great thing, given you build some
libraries on your best trade cities to actually activate the gain.


-----------
JSB Cthdrl:
-----------

Cost to build: 400 resources
Since: Religion
Text: The unhappy people in all cities of the continent decrease by 2.

You have to have this, especially on the Emperor difficulty level. Actually, if
you don't buy this, your cities will hardly grow to size 10. 


----------
D. Voyage:
----------

Cost to build: 300 resources
Since: Railroad
Text: With 'Darwin's voyage,' your civilization gains the next two expertises
you choose.

Prefer to build this later, the expertise curve is exponential, which means the
more you learn, the longer will take to learn the next one. But do it before
the FutrTechs anyway, I'd say around 'Plastics' is too late too, around 'Solar'
or 'Union' should be good.


-----------
Hoover dam:
-----------

Cost to build: 600 resources
Since: Television
Text: Electrification of cities on continent increases production by 50% as
pollution decreases.

This is very good to have on your biggest continent, of course. This and a
Manufac. P will give the best results for production, it can get to building a
SS Module in 4 or 5 turns at better cities.


---------
Suffrage:
---------

Cost to build: 600 resources
Since: Industrial
Text: 'Republicanism'/'Democracy' reduce unhappiness due to units outside home
city, with 'Women's Sufferage.'

Some people might start to think Suffrage is not that important, but they just
think that way because they never saw what happens when you change your
government to republic before building one. Without a suffrage, you can't have
a boat out of the city, it generates unhappiness in the city. If you defend
cities with knights like me so you can capture barbarian leaders, you need one
of this.
Note: Settlers, diplomats and caravans don't add unhappy people to their
cities.


-----------
Manhttn Pr:
-----------

Cost to build: 600 resources
Since: Fission
Text: 'Manhattan Project' completion starts nuclear weapon production in cities
with technology.

Actually, what it means is that you can build nuclear weapons after building
this. If you're going to nuke them all, global warm and stuff, of course you'll
need this. If you're not... just the score please.


------
U. N.:
------

Cost to build: 600 resources
Since: Communism
Text: Negociations with other civilizations will always bring offers of peace.

This is the same of a Great Wall, but without the gunpowder cancel. It's a good
thing to have if you don't want to fight, if you're behind, or if you want to
sneak attack more often.


----------
Apollo P.:
----------

Cost to build: 600 resources
Since: Flight3
Text: Civilizations with technology to produce spaceship components may produce
spacecraft.

Flight3 is a late expertise, usually on last 5 before futrtechs, so as if this
is mandatory to build a spaceship, if you're going to build it, search for your
better production cities, put a factory or manufac there and after it's done,
you'll need at least two other cities to build all the 'spacecraft' you need.
For maximizing score, you need all of them, described in a later section called
'The Spaceship'. As late expertise, you'll probably already be using good
productions spots and know well where they are, so it won't be a big problem,
especially if you have a lot of cities, probably between 50~60.

And the game doesn't say this, but it lets you see all enemy cities on map,
even in the middle of darkness, undiscovered terrains.


-----------
SETI Prgrm:
-----------

Cost to build: 600 resources
Since: Computers
Text: Knowledge produced by your cities increases 50%.

Increasing of more 50% of knowledge? Yes please. The faster you get futrtechs,
the better. I say this because Computers is one of the 10 last expertises you
can get.


-----------
CureCancer:
-----------

Cost to build: 600 resources
Since: Genetics
Text: All cities in your civilization increase happiness by 1.

Remember to build this early when you change your government to republic or
democracy, it's just a good help and makes easier for thanksgiving festivals to
happen.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  VI- Settlers                                                        [00006]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

About settlers, the first thing you should know if you're a beginner, is that
you'll have a lot of settlers, if you want your terrain to be best, at least
two from each city, but only after you get railroads, before that, one is the
most you can. There is not such a thing as "You have settlers enough", you
never have. But there is a thing that is "You can't make a settler any more".
With this limitation, you should have one settler for each city, and if you
started with two of them, keep the settler NONE, it's really good to have a
settler that don't cost food or build points to any city.

Ok, on with some things you can do with terrains.


-----
Move:
-----

You move your settler once per turn, from one spot to another, unless there is
a road, then settler moves 3 spots, or a railroad, which if you build enough,
will make you cross the entire continent.


----------
Replenish:
----------

This is a way to discard a settler that will help the city you do it on, it can
only be done on cities under level 10, and watch out if you're not going to
starve them in the future. If you find out the settler's home city will have a
shortage of food, and you're near any tiny growing city, replenish and you
solve two problems.


-------
Sentry:
-------

There is hardly a reason to make a settler sentry, unless you plan to take it
on a sea trip and you're still building up the boat. A settler NONE, after you
built everything you need, can be sentried to become aware of barbarians, so it
can run away, or if an enemy settler plunder your irrigations, you can do it
again.

Be careful, if you sentry a settler, you can only unsentry it in the next turn.


--------
Defense:
--------

Settlers have 1 defense point, which means if they're working and a barbarian
or enemy in general attack it, there is a chance the settler will win and the
enemy will be destroyed. But why bother letting your settler have this fight
when there are much better defensive units?

Avoid doing this for settlers, let the phalanxes take care of it. And it loses
the settler's turn if you do it, you can only stop defending in the next turn.


----------
Home City:
----------

You can change the home city of a settler by walking on a different city and
using this command. If the settler is costing too much food resources for your
current city, and another city is growing too fast and you can't hold it for
long, change it to the growing city and it will grow less fast, while the
former home city will grow faster again. This works better on despotism and
anarchy, sadly.

Oh, and if you click this with your settler NONE, it will cease to be a settler
NONE, starting to depend on a city. Never to this. Never.

This command doesn't end the turn, so do it without fear when you can.


-----------
Irrigation:
-----------

This can only be done in spots of grass, river, ground or desert that are near
the ocean, rivers, and other irrigated spots. You can spread your irrigation
through the inside continent this way. And if you tell the settler to ground or
grass (when in jungles, swamps or forests), the game consider it as irrigating,
since it puts an 'I' for its command.

The time a settler takes to irrigate a spot and become available again varies a
little on the type of terrain: 5 turns for any flat spot, and 10 turns for
hills.


-----
Road:
-----

Roads are trade, and movement three times faster. Build up roads, connect
cities, make the work of war units and caravans easier with roads, I prefer to
build roads only near cities, but again, I build cities whenever the settler is
away from a city area by 1 or 2 spots.

Roads take 2 turns to be done, but if you're building them on forests, swamps,
hills, jungles, tundra or arctic, it will take 4 turns, and on mountains it's 6
turns.


---------
Railroad:
---------

With railroads, your game gets easier, since their movement cost is 0, any unit
can cross the continent in one turn. Settlers are no exception, you can be
working with a settler on one side, and then, need it on the other side, move
it there. Railroads are 50% more of everything you irrigated (or mined) too.

Railroads take double the time of roads to be built, so, 4 turns for flat
terrains, 8 turns for defensive and ice, and 12 turns for mountains.


-----
Mine:
-----

Remember you can't have irrigation and mine on the same spot. A mine is a good
way to use hills and mountains to give you more build points (the shields, the
shields!) and since you're interested in building things faster than the
enemies (especially wonders).. try to mine every gold bar you can.

All mines will make the settler build it for 10 turns.


--------
Plunder:
--------

Not worth it. Plunder actually destroys irrigation, mines,.. it's like going
back. You don't wish it even for your enemies.

It costs only 1 turn to do it, though.


---------
Fortress:
---------

Fortress can be good for defense, but to move a settler to war ahead of other
troops? Unthinkable. Prefer to build fortress over hills and mountains if the
enemies are coming..

It's 5 turns waiting for a fortress to be done. But if you do it on hills,
forests, swamps, jungles.. it will take 6 turns, .. and on mountains, 7 turns.


-----
Wait:
-----

If a settler is doing something, you can stop its work, wait, and on the same
turn, continue, or change to another, so, if you told your settler to grass a
jungle, there is an alternative in case you change your mind. But the command
wait is more because you can be moving more settlers around, and you might need
to wait for another one to move before the one you told to wait.


---------
No Order:
---------

It is rare, but sometimes your settler will have to wait for one or two turns
to be able to move, maybe because an enemy is getting near it, or a barbarian.
Don't let your settler be threatened like this, run away to a city, and wait
there with 'no order' until there is room for working again.


--------
Disband:
--------

If all your cities passed level 9 to 10, you can't replenish anymore, so if you
need to undo the settler, there is this final option. But prefer to replenish
or create a new city, always leave your options open. If the home city of the
settler is happy enough and the settler is disbanded or replenished, there will
be a thanksgiving festival for one turn, given the city was not growing before.


--------------------------------
How many settlers should I have?
--------------------------------

The more the merrier, I'd say. In the start, have only 1 settler for each city,
or you'll hinder their growing, unless in the exception of a irrigated oasis,
you can hold two. After the advent of railroads, you can have as much as you
want, given the city has food points to spare. I've had a city build 8 settlers
and another have 6 of them once, it started to use up too much the build points
so I stopped producing them. But it was enough, and some turns near the end, I
made the remaining of them become 5 cities in the same turn, all around the
only enemy city left, all of them took festivals and grew around level 10~14
with a little diplomatic help stepping on the enemy spots, and a cruiser to
steal their fish =)


-----------------
The Settler NONE:
-----------------

A settler is an eating machine that costs 1 or 2 food point from its city all
the time, like a parasit. But you don't need a settler to belong to any city,
because there is the settler NONE option! How to do it is simple:

- Make a new city, prefer it to be in forest or an oil drop, or have both near
it.
- Put the production to be a settler right away.
- If you don't pick a very good spot for build points, it will cost out of
your pockets, since the settler must be done when the city is still level 1.
- You'll get the common message for 'At City they build a settler' and then it
will show the map with the city, that became a settler, owned by NONE.
- If it didn't happen, that's because the SNES version has this glitch where
it does not always recognize a city will disappear after making a settler NONE,
so there are some ways to force it to happen.
1. Buy another settler, and disband it, or replenish another city.
2. Sell all buildings you could possibly have added to the city before.
3. Make the city have the most build points it can.

You should keep this settler for irrigations, roads and mines only, never make
a city with him, use settler owned by cities to do the steps above, you can
make an army of these if you want =P

Just if you keep failing at doing this process, remember that it's impossible
to build a settler NONE on Chieftain difficulty, the game prevents it to
happen, because this way you would lose a city.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  VII- Governments                                                    [00007]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You start a game with a government, since all civilizations with a leader have
one, which is usually despotism or anarchy.

At some point, you look at that revolution option on the menu, and ask yourself
"Gee, what does this do?". And then you rebel and citizens all over the nation
will be demanding for a new government. Luckily, when you do this, you already
have some government learned as expertise. But if you were following the FAQ,
be sure to know when you're ready to change government.


-------------------
Despotism/Dictator:
-------------------

You start at it. You get no food bonus for irrigating grass and river spots,
a citizen can become unhappy if you have no protection for his/her city, people
demand more war units, you can cancel (tear up) all peace treaties whenever you
want, and demand tributes on enemy civilizaions. It's easier to keep people
happy, despite the corruption being the highest possible. You get no bonus
trade too. Units with this city as home cost 1 shield to maintain, IF there is
more than the city level. And settlers cost 1 food point to the city too.


--------
Anarchy:
--------

This is the government you get for pressing revolution, just until you can
choose the government again. You get nearly all the same attributes from
despotism, the big difference is that corruption is a little lower for some
reason.


---------
Monarchy:
---------

With monarchy, you start getting normal food points for irrigating all flats
terrains, so grass and river count as 1 more, which will make cities grow
faster and to higher levels. Happiness start getting a little harder to keep,
and maintenance of units is 1 shield, plus 2 food points if it's a settler.
Corruption is lowered, but the farther from the capital, the more you have. And
the trade points are still the same, it only raises 1 on gold bars.


--------------------
Communism/Socialism:
--------------------

This socialism is a translation error, probably, but when you change government
it will show up. It's not that different from Monarchy, as you get the same
points from any terrain, but the government puts your corruption rate to lower
levels since all cities start being treated like they're 10 squares from the
palace. 


---------
Republic:
---------

With republic, you get a big boost of trade since all roads you did before and
where giving you 1 trade point, now give 2 trade points, and ocean raises from
2 to 3. This way, even on low level new cities, you might be getting happy
citizens with a distribution that gives 2 or 3 for lux. Actually, it's almost
mandatory to raise your lux at this point, because citizens are much harder to
please. It's very usual for some cities to riot when you first enter republic,
but you can fix it with few Elvis, and some cities will pass from festivals to
rioting in few turns, if you can't control the city growth. Corruption still
exists, so building courthouses here and there is useful.


----------
Democracy:
----------

They say democracy is the best government. Personally, I never got to like it,
prefering republic. You get all the same trade bonuses, food gains and shields,
but the biggest problem on democracy is that if a city riots for more than 1 or
2 turns, your government is thrown all the way back to anarchy. And if two
cities riot, it's immediate. Maybe I should test it with bigger lux percentages
in the future, 5 or 6 should prevent the anarchy. Also, you get the lowest
corruption possible.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  VIII- Money                                                         [00008]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I'm holding a money section, because some people have trouble raising it, or
maybe spending it. So, as there is not much to add from other sections, I'll
treat this as a FAQ instead of a walkthrough.

-------------------
How to raise money:
-------------------

There are some ways to raise money in Civilization:
- Set the taxes higher: with this, all of your cities will be giving you extra
money every turn.
- Set the citizens as tax collectors: in pair with setting taxes higher, you
have the extra option to decrease the food gain to make a citizen one tax
collector, you get 2 more $, 3 if the city has marketplace, and 4 if it has a
bank too.
- Sell buildings: you can sell buildings, and the money worth is calculated
exactly like the resources used to build it. 40 for barracks, 60 for granary,
320 for a manufac p.... the idea is to sell what you're not using.
- Capture barbarian leaders: 100$ each. They are a little rare most times, so
don't count on them for a 'salary'.
- Find a village that gives you precious metals: again, this is a little rare,
and more random. 50$ each, in the beginning it sounds good but later on it
sounds even cheap.
- Capture enemy cities: you get enemy money to yourself. Depends on how well he
is doing. And you get a new city if you didn't destroy it.
- Move caravans to distant cities: the more distant the city, the more money
you get. I never had it raise 40$ in one trip, anyway, so it's hard to count on
this for the money, it's more for the trade points.
- Demand tributes: when you have an audience with an enemy, you will have this
option (unless you changed government to democracy or republic)... most enemies
pay if they are weaker than you. Lincoln especially is very friendly when it
comes to recognizing a stronger civilization and he's good at raising money too
so you can get 50$ from him a lot.

*hint* Sell all of your barracks one turn before learning 'Combustion' or
'Gunpowder'. When they get obsolete, they aren't sold, they get destroyed.

*hint2* If you're moving your palace, sell the old one 1 turn before, it has to
be 1 turn before because of corruption issues. Or maybe you can sell it, and
start your new capital from a settler. If you don't have a palace, the next
city you start will have it.


--------------------
Ways to spend money:
--------------------

Now you can spend your money:
- Buying your buildings: it costs their resources times 4, if I'm not mistaken.
With this you can stop those constant messages of 'you need aqueducts here and
there'. If people are unhappy and starting a riot, buy them a cathedral or
colosseum.
- Buying your units: it costs their resources times 6 (not sure), and
sometimes you'll need to protect a city quicker because of unwanted guests that
decided to sniff their nose around (your brand new city, perhaps?).
- Buying your wonders: you can do this if you have a great amount of money, I
mean a rich amount, most wonders cost 3200$, so you don't need to wait 58 turns
for your Suffrage to be done.
- Paying tributes: if your enemy demands tributes, you can pay it, they will
always leave you alone after this, and most times they charge you 50$ or 100$,
which is easy to get again. This way they always sign a peace treaty.
- Requesting reinforcements: if you ask your enemies to help you on war against
another enemy, they will ask for extra war funds (or bribing, I suppose), so
they can believe you.
- Go go diplomat: a diplomat can buy you new troops (given there is only one on
the spot, which is most usual), and incite revolution on enemy cities so that
they become yours WITH all the units inside for your usage. This is the best
way to spend your money in my opinion. If a barbarian group took a city from
you, buy it back, they build phalanxes and the cost will be very cheap, because
barbarians are much more corrupt.

*hint* A building costs less than half the initial price if you buy it on the
second turn, given your city have at least one shield. This is a less costly
way to build up cities that have less than 6 shields to use on construction.

*hint2* If Stallin is charging you 1000$ on tributes, and Hamurabi is asking
you for only 400$ to go to war against the russians,... go with the second
option. Babylonians always lose the war against russians in my games, but they
serve as shield =P

*hint3* Buildings cost less than units, so if you need to buy a chariot with
urgency, buy a temple, and then change it to a chariot. It works for all units
with resource cost lower or equal than the building.


-------------------------------------
What happens if you run out of money:
-------------------------------------

The game has this way of telling you you're getting short on finances, so you
can never bankrupt completely. First he will warn you your funds are rapidly
decreasing, even if they were slowly decreasing, and then he will get your most
expensive building and sell it for you. This way the cost will be shortened for
the next turn. Of course he only sells it if there was no other way of keeping
you from having a negative number for cash. With no money, you can't buy
things, can't incite revolts, bribe units, in fact, it's dangerous to have 0 in
cash. So, don't be afraid to raise taxes a little, or even go with a
distribution of 0.10.0 for extreme cases.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  IX- The War                                                         [00009]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When it comes to the war, first you need to know your units, and how are the
basics for a fight. All units have an attack number, a defense number, and a
movement number. Remember those move costs on the terrains section? That's the
use. It's very simple actually, the attack being bigger than the defense, the
unit is good for attack, so, when you start a game, a good expertise to start
with is 'The Wheel', because chariots have 4 for attack number. And 2 for
movement, which makes them move around much faster.

Well, these are all units you can build, when they are available, and when they
are not available because they get obsolete too. And ADM stands for 'A'ttack
'D'efense 'M'ovement, by the way.

--------
Settler:
--------

ADM: 0 : 1 : 1
Cost to build: 40 resources
Since: Game start
Obsoletes: never
Text: Adventurous citizens with the important tasks of building cities and
developing nearby areas.

Detailed in the Settlers section, before. And.... never attack anything with
them, even barbarian leaders win.

--------
Militia:
--------

ADM: 1 : 1 : 1
Cost to build: 10 resources
Since: Game start
Obsoletes: after getting Gunpowder
Text: A military unit that can be formed in the first stages of a new
civilization.

Militias are not good enough to defend cities, since the enemies will be soon
approaching you with chariots and catapults, (4 and 6 of attack, respectively).
That's why your first expertises should focus on better units. Also, never use
a militia for attack, unless in the rarest case, a barbarian leader passes by
and stop just near him.


--------
Phalanx:
--------

ADM: 1 : 2 : 1
Cost to build: 20 resources
Since: Bronze Wrk
Obsoletes: after getting Gunpowder
Text: Infantry armed with spears. They possess good defensive power and provide
superior defense for cities.

Yeah, superior defense for cities for the first 4.000 years, ok, but they will
be obsoleted. Phalanxes are great when it comes to defending against barbarians
and sneak attacks, and they get almost invincible when they're on a mountain.
But again, for the first 4.000 years only, eventually better defensive units
will be available. And again, don't attack with a phalanx, unless the enemy is
a barbarian leader next to him.


-------
Legion:
-------

ADM: 3 : 1 : 1
Cost to build: 20 resources
Since: Iron Work
Obsoletes: after getting Conscript
Text: Infantry with shields, short swords and lances. Cheap and effective
attack unit.

I wouldn't spend time on building one of these, but if you get them from a
village, might as well use it. Their attack is a little inferior to a
chariot, but they can be good for exploring and for taking enemy cities
sometimes.


----------
Musket'rs:
----------

ADM: 2 : 3 : 1
Cost to build: 30 resources
Since: Gunpowder
Obsoletes: after getting Conscript
Text: Infantry with muskets. Superior defensive units, useful with heavy
infantry, which needs protection.

These guys will be your main defense when you get to gunpowder, they cost
just a little more to produce, but it's worth it. Conscript is not far
away if you play like me, avoiding gunpowder until the last moment, but
1 or 2 cities will probably build these in the meanwhile.


-----
Lcav:
-----

ADM: 2 : 1 : 2 
Cost to build: 20 resources
Since: Riding
Obsoletes: after getting Conscript
Text: Cavalry. Quick and useful for reconnaissance and surprise attacks.

Lcavs are good for exploring yor first continent and taking villages and non
protected cities. I wouldn't build one, but as mercenaries, they're the best.


-------
Rifles:
-------

ADM: 3 : 5 : 1
Cost to build: 30 resources
Since: Conscript
Obsoletes: never
Text: Infantry with rifles. Great defense and can be used in place of heavy
infantry and musketeers.

Have these protect your cities. Get conscript as soon as you can, and mark a
good centered city to produce them all for the continent. They win against
all initial units, and the enemy loves to attack with these all the time.
They're your final protection, in the end.


--------
Chariot:
--------

ADM: 4 : 1 : 2
Cost to build: 40 resources
Since: The Wheel
Obsoletes: after getting Chivalry
Text: Soldiers and commanders riding light vehicles. Best when used in mobile
attacks but weak defensive units.

Your main unit for exploration when the game starts, mostly the best advance
you can get for starting is 'The Wheel'. Chariots are all you need for attack
on a despotic conquest, they go fast and take cities from any enemy. You never
have too many chariots, and you never stop expanding. Load your ships with
them and go to other continents, always taking everything you can yo yourself.
Chariots are the favorite units of every one that is conquering the world.


--------
Knights:
--------

ADM: 4 : 2 : 2
Cost to build: 40 resources
Since: Chivalry
Obsoletes: after getting Automobile
Text: Armored knights on large, powerful horses. Combines effective attacks
with defense and mobility.

I wouldn't change chariots for these, but sometimes a village gives you the
opportunity for using knights. When you get to these, they can be used for
attack and to protect cities, so don't mourn over your losses, knights can
be cool too. But if you can, chivalry is an expertise you can get last,
after rocketry, nuclear, and fusion, even.


---------
Catapult:
---------

ADM: 6 : 1 : 1
Cost to build: 40 resources
Since: Math
Obsoletes: after getting Metallurgy
Text: Catapults, attack weapon that hurl large rocks with force. Useful in
attacking cities, weak when alone.

The text is pretty much accurate for catapults, they're good for attacking
cities, and they're too vulnerable when alone. Personally, I only get catapults
by bribing enemy units, and near roads. And I disband all of them when changing
government.


-------
Cannon:
-------

ADM: 8 : 1 : 1
Cost to build: 40 resources
Since: Metallurgy
Obsoletes: after getting Robotics
Text: Fixed, immobile, unrifled field cannons. Great attack units, and very
useful with rifle infantry.

Cannons are pretty much the evolution to catapults in Civ. The attack is bigger
so you can take any city defended by phalanxes, but at this point, you'll most
probably be fighting musketeers, and there is nothing like 100% chance of
winning in battles. It's too rare for me to build a cannon in a game.


------
Armor:
------

ADM: 10 : 5 : 3
Cost to build: 80 resources
Since: Automobile
Obsoletes: never
Text: Armored cars. Superior in attack and mobility; one of the best land
units.

If you still go to war after getting to 'Automobile', use these to attack, the
armors. They simply destroy anything in their way, attack three times if next
to the enemy city, and their defense is good too, you could even use them for
defending your cities. 


---------
Mech Inf:
---------

ADM: 6 : 6 : 3
Cost to build: 50 resources
Since: Union
Obsoletes: never
Text: Modern infantry in armored cars. Most effective land defensive units,
useful in protecting valuable areas.

These are my favorite units for defending cities, they have your best defense
value, 9 when veteran, and their mobility lets you have only them for
protection, they can even capture barbarian leaders and go back to the city on
the same turn, most of the times.


----------
Artillery:
----------

ADM: 12 : 2 : 2
Cost to build: 60 resources
Since: Robotics
Obsoletes: never
Text: Squad of large-bore self-propelled guns. Attack by self-propelled guns
negates the effect of walls.

Artillery is only good for hi-tech war, robotics is a very late expertise, so
when you get it, you might be aiming for the spaceship, but they can take
nearly any enemy city in few attacks, and they're not hard to get close to a
city, like cannons or catapults.


--------
Fighter:
--------

ADM: 4 : 2 : 10 (air)
Cost to build: 60 resources
Since: Flight1
Obsoletes: never
Text: Only fighter squadrons can attack bombers; they will crash if not in home
city or carrier by end of turn.

Fighters are hard maintenance for a game, they make lower turns as you use a
lot of time moving them and calculating if they'll be safe by the end of all
turns. Their attack is only good for fighting low level units, so it's hard to
actually put them to good use.


-------
Bomber:
-------

ADM: 12 : 1 : 8 (air)
Cost to build: 120 resources
Since: Flight2
Obsoletes: never
Text: Bombers can remain in air through 1 turn but must return to home city or
carrier by next turn.

Bombers are different than fighters. With them, you can let them be in air for
1 turn. So, if you have two of them and an army of enemies is getting close,
ground enemies, let's say, you can leave a bomber out there and it will really
hinder their progress and movement. Most enemies run away when they can move
adjacent. So, bombers are good for defensive strategies, except when the enemy
can build fighters.


--------
Trireme:
--------

ADM: 1 : 0 : 3 (ocean)
Cost to build: 40 resources
Since: Map Making
Obsoletes: after getting Navigation
Text: Ocean-going galleys can transport 2 units. They may be lost if not next
to land at end of turn.

It's a flawed ocean unit, but you can build it after getting only 2 expertises.
Not a bad idea to invade other continents real early with this transporting a
settler and a chariot, but if you need to deal with enemies in your continent
first, prefer to wait for the 'Sail' unit.


-----
Sail:
-----

ADM: 1 : 1 : 3 (ocean)
Cost to build: 40 resources
Since: Navigation
Obsoletes: after getting Compass
Text: Small, lightly armed ship. Useful in performing initial sea search, they
can transport 3 units.

This is your main ocean unit. When you get to build these, ppreferably have the
wonder Lighthouse, and delay learning 'Compass' as much as you can, while
building the Expedition, somewhere else. As they can take 3 units inside them,
chariot, diplomat, and settler comes to mind. A good combo for new continent
exploration.


--------
Frigate:
--------

ADM: 2 : 2 : 3 (ocean)
Cost to build: 40 resources
Since: Compass
Obsoletes: after getting Industrial
Text: Heavily armed, high-speed ship. Can transport up to 4 units.

Ok, in the event you learned compass too early because of a village or a trade,
you get to use frigates instead of sails. They can transport 4 units, which
gives more options for new continent and island discovering. They can even
attack triremes and sails from other civilizations and barbarians.


---------
Ironclad:
---------

ADM: 4 : 4 : 4 (ocean)
Cost to build: 60 resources
Since: Steam eng
Obsoletes: after getting Combustion
Text: Steel-plated, high-speed steamship. Cannot transport but can attack enemy
ships. Cannot attack shore.

I hardly never have a sea war, so ironclads are useless to me. But if you get
to see too many enemy triremes and sails around your ocean cities, build one of
these and don't have any mercy, if you destroy a sail or trireme, you often get
the message for destroying more than 1 unit.


--------
Cruiser:
--------

ADM: 6 : 6 : 6 (ocean)
Cost to build: 80 resources
Since: Combustion
Obsoletes: never
Text: High-speed, well-armed cruiser. Cannot transport but can bombard shore. 2
square view range.

By the time I get to combustion, I usually prefer to focus on ground defending,
but most of the times, I build two of these to map the poles and see if I
forgot to conquer some island that was still undiscovered. Cruisers have good
attack and good defense, they move great distances especially with wonder
Expedition, and enemies never bother attacking them, at least I neve saw it
happen.


-----------
Battle Shp:
-----------

ADM: 18 : 12 : 4 (ocean)
Cost to build: 160 resources
Since: Steel
Obsoletes: never
Text: Heavily armed and armored. Cannot transport but can bombard shore. 2
square viewing range.

Their attack and defense are incredibly good, but as I said before, ocean war
is too rare in my games, so I never saw any use for them. Maybe for protecting
shore cities, onyl those that produce fast enough so you don't spend too much
time building one.


----
Sub:
----

ADM: 8 : 2 : 3 (ocean)
Cost to build: 50 resources
Since: Mass Prod
Obsoletes: never
Text: Submarine. 2 square viewing range. Cannot be detected if it does not
touch enemy.

Subs are a good option to spy on enemies from other continents, they hardly get
even noticed. Their view makes them good for exploration too, you might forget
an island near poles, so unveil everything near them too. I prefer to do this
with Cruisers, anyway.


--------
Carrier:
--------

ADM: 1 : 12 : 5 (ocean)
Cost to build: 160 resources
Since: Flight2
Obsoletes: never
Text: Aircraft carrier. Functions as base for fighters, bombers and nuclear
missiles--up to 8 units.

If you're going to use air units, or go to a hi-tech war, these are very useful
for carrying your planes, otherwise, I wouldn't bother having one.


----------
Transport:
----------

ADM: 0 : 3 : 4 (ocean)
Cost to build: 50 resources
Since: Industrial
Obsoletes: never
Text: Large, modern transport. Carries up to 8 units; useful for invasions.

They move 8 units. You can go with 8 settlers to a new island and populate it
with 2 or 3 good size cities in a few turns with these. Plus this is the way to
a 'Diploblitz' (which will be explained in a later section).. these are your
best ocean transport units. Industrial is early for most science paths, so it
can be a very useful unit for war and bringing chariots to the war on other
continents too.


------
Nukes:
------

ADM: 99 : 0 : 16
Cost to build: 160 resources
Since: Rocketry
Obsoletes: never
Text: Nuclear missiles. Cannot be activated until 'Manhattan Project' takes
place. Note the effect they have.

I wouldn't bother building one of these as they can lower your score, with
global warming or even making people in cities unhappy, but if an enemy piss
you off enough to ask for this, nuke them out, it destroys their land, their
units, prevents cities from growing healthy, and can taking out anything in a
range of 16 squares from the city launching them.


---------
Diplomat:
---------

ADM: 0 : 0 : 2
Cost to build: 30 resources
Since: Writing
Obsoletes: never
Text: Diplomatic envoys for negociations with other nations, but can also spy,
subvert, and other tasks.

See the next section for more information on these little devils =)


--------
Caravan:
--------

ADM: 0 : 1 : 1
Cost to build: 50 resources
Since: Trade
Obsoletes: never
Text: Trade goods and material transport. Can help to complete 'wonders' once
routes are established.

I'll tell you all you need to know about caravans. They build wonders. And they
get you trade routes established, which raises trade too. The proceeds in cash
will be very low, but the outcome in about 30~40 turns is really great. Don't
forget to have railroads connecting your cities so you can maximize caravan
usage.


----------
War hints:
----------

- Make sure you avoid to just run in the direction of the enemy carelessly,
their troops show up and sometimes you'll lose units to a stealth-like chariot,
so go with different paths, they can be a little longer, but the enemy isn't
waiting for them, most of the times.

- Use their roads! If you took an enemy city down and you find a road, it's
probably connected to another city, after something like this, even the most
war lover Alexander that considered you an insignificant evil tribe will be
begging you to spare him, and paying at least 50$ in tributes!

- On your turn, when near the enemy city, move first your backup units coming
as reinforcements, and then the front line, this way, you can take out an enemy
that was keeping you from moving 'adjacent', and then reach the city with 2 or
3 chariots, and attack it like crazy, or even bring some diplomat to incite a
revolt.

- When you take an enemy city, sell out all the improvements. Even if you were
going to use them, sell them to get money, and then build them when the war is
far from this city. It's more cash-smart this way.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  X- Diplomats                                                        [00010]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You bring up two diplomats, and you can't incite revolt because this is the
enemy's capital, what to do?

Ok, ok, first let me introduce the diplomat unit. Diplomats are little devils
that make use of your money funds to buy out enemy units and even cities with
all improvements and defenders it has. Diplomats spy, steal knowledge, destroy
entire buildings, and change the owner of a city. They can see the City menu
screen for an enemy city too, just they can't move anything this way.

Oh, these commands you get when a diplomat meets an enemy city make the
diplomat be disbanded after.


---------------------
Establish an embassy:
---------------------

Remember that screen on Advice -> Intelligence I told you about? This screen
only showed your status as the game sees, but if you get a diplomat near a city
and use this command, you get some info on your enemy too, well, English and
French are usually civilized, Russia and Mongol are aggressive, Roman is
perfectionist, Gandhi is friendly (even calling us a joke all the time), and so
on. This can vary a lot, I even got an agressive expansionist Ganhdi once as
enemy.


------------------
Search for cities:
------------------

Now you can see the City Menu for the enemy city, you can even press the side
arrows and see the production and the armed forces. If you can see the spots in
use, you can mark them somehow, and go there with some lcavs and chariots, step
these spots a lot, and the city will starve some levels down.


-----------------
Steal technology:
-----------------

Well, well, Stallin is (again) avoiding a peace offer by calling you
insignificant and demanding 1000$ in tribute, just to keep you from trading
expertises with him that you know they have? If he learned something before
you, steal from him with a diplomat.


------------------
Cause destruction:
------------------

If you get to the enemy city with a group of diplomats, and you find out you
can't buy it with a little revolting, there is the option of causing the
building to be destroyed. If the building destroyed is the enemy palace, voila,
you can not just buy the city, you get it for about 30% of the price! They sell
cheap, and all the other cities this civilization have will be completely
corrupted, so you can buy all them at cheap prices given you have enough
diplomats already on the line. Or if the building was the city walls, chariots
can complete the job taking over the city much easier, too.


------------------
Incite revolution:
------------------

Want to keep everything your enemy have in this city? Even all the defense?
Nearly every enemy city can be bought with this command. Their price will be
calculated on the improvements and units, their corruption and the distance
from their palace. Most of the times I get prices around 600$, and when I start
to attack with diplomats, I usually have around 3000$ already. Reverting the
city to your command is like taking the city by force, you get an amount of
cash, an expertise, and any treaty is over, until their leader decides to talk
to you,.. sometimes they get cheap shots with this, but it's very rare.

If you don't get enough money for the transaction or say no, you don't lose the
diplomat, but you lose his turn.


------------------------
Have audience with king:
------------------------

This command is an exception, your diplomat won't vanish after using it, but
his turn will be used. With this "attack", you can sneak attack one or two of
the enemy's forces that were bothering you, and then if your diplomat is near
the city, you get to redo the peace treaty in no time! You can approach two
cities with diplomats, and revert one to yourself, if you ran out of money to
buy the other one, just keep the peace until you get the money again.


--------
Bribing:
--------

* Oh help, a chariot is coming to kill my diplomat, what do I do?
- Well, go with the diplomat moving in the enemy's direction, and see how much
he accepts for changing uniforms and starting fighting for you. They use higher
prices when too near to the capital, but I usually get around 200$ for each. If
you do this, the enemy unit will belong to your nearest city, not sure how this
is calculated, but they never get NONE..


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  XI- Science                                                         [00011]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

About science, what do you need to know? Let me see, what you want in science
depends on your strategy, and there are 2 main approaches on this: the war,
and the spaceship. If you're thinking about war, go with the nastier names on
the list, always starting with "The Wheel", and following with "Bronze Wrk",
"Iron Work", "Math", and then "Burial". Wait, why "Math", why "Burial"? Because
it leads to "Mysticism", which leads to "Astronomy", and finally to
"Navigation", and you need it to travel overseas. But if you choose the
building up the science to go for the spaceship kind of game, you should start
with a slightly different approach, but I really think your first priority on
both strategies is to expand very fast, and dominate all other civilizations
quickly, so, cornering one of them after killing all others is the best way to
start the spaceship game. It's not the only way, it's my strategy.

Here are all the knowledges of SNES Civilization:

---------
Alphabet:
---------

Learnable from start, sometimes already known.

What can you build with it:
Nothing..

What can you learn by knowing it:
Laws
Map Making
Math (after getting Masonry)
Writing


----------
Astronomy:
----------

Must have: Math, Mysticism

What can you build with it:
C. Observ (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Navigation (after getting Map Making)
Gravity (after getting University)


-------
Atomic:
-------

Must have: Gravity, Physics

What can you build with it:
Nothing new..

What can you learn by knowing it:
Fission (after getting Mass Prod)


-----------
Automobile:
-----------

Must have: Combustion, Steel

What can you build with it:
Armor (unit)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Mass Prod (after getting Corporat'n)


--------
Banking:
--------

Must have: Republic, Trade

What can you build with it:
Bank (building)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Industrial (after getting Railroad)
Corporat'n (after getting Industrial)


---------
Bridging:
---------

Must have: Construct, Iron Work

What can you build with it:
Nothing, but your settlers become able to build roads on river spots.

What can you learn by knowing it:
Railroad (after getting Steam Eng)


-----------
Bronze Wrk:
-----------

Learnable from start, sometimes already known. Wrk = game typo.

What can you build with it:
Phalanx (unit)
Colossus (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Currency
Iron Work


-------
Burial:
-------

Learnable from start, sometimes already known.

What can you build with it:
Temple (building)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Monarchy (after getting Laws)
Mysticism


----------
Chemistry:
----------

Must have: Medicine, University

What can you build with it:
Nothing new..

What can you learn by knowing it:
Refining (after getting Corporat'n)
Explosives (after getting Gunpowder)


---------
Chivalry:
---------

Must have: Riding, Stirrup

What can you build with it:
Knights (unit)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Nothing new..


-----------
Combustion:
-----------

Must have: Explosives, Refining

What can you build with it:
Cruiser (unit, ocean only)
Also, your barracks will all be obsoleted..

What can you learn by knowing it:
Flight1 (after getting Physics)
Automobile (after getting Steel)


----------
Communism:
----------

Must have: Industrial, Philosophy

What can you build with it:
U. N. (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Union (after getting Mass Prod)


--------
Compass:
--------

Must have: Navigation, Physics

What can you build with it:
Frigate (unit, ocean only)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Electric (after getting Metallurgy)


----------
Computers:
----------

Must have: Math, Television

What can you build with it:
SETI Prgrm (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Flight3 (after getting Rocketry)
Robotics (after getting Plastics)


----------
Conscript:
----------

Must have: Explosives, Republic

What can you build with it:
Rifles (unit)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Nothing new..


----------
Construct:
----------

Must have: Currency, Masonry

What can you build with it:
Aqueduct (building)
Colosseum (building)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Engin'rng (after getting The Wheel)
Bridging (after getting Iron Work)


-----------
Corporat'n:
-----------

Must have: Banking, Industrial

What can you build with it:
Noyhing new..

What can you learn by knowing it:
Mass Prod (after getting Automobile)
Refining (after getting Chemistry)
Genetics (after getting Medicine)


---------
Currency:
---------

Must have: Bronze Wrk

What can you build with it:
Marktplc (building)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Trade (after getting Laws)
Construct (after getting Masonry)


----------
Democracy:
----------

Must have: Literacy, Philosophy

What can you build with it:
Nothing but the government

What can you learn by knowing it:
Solar (after getting Mass Prod)


---------
Electric:
---------

Must have: Compass, Metallurgy

What can you build with it:
Nothing new..

What can you learn by knowing it:
Television (after getting Engin'rng)
Flight2 (after getting Flight1)


----------
Engin'rng:
----------

Must have: Construct, The Wheel

What can you build with it:
Nothing new..

What can you learn by knowing it:
Television (after getting Electric)
Invention (after getting Literacy)


-----------
Explosives:
-----------

Must have: Chemistry, Gunpowder

What can you build with it:
Nothing new..

What can you learn by knowing it:
Combustion (after getting Refining)
Conscript (after getting Republic)


--------
Fission:
--------

Must have: Atomic, Mass Prod

What can you build with it:
Manhttn Pr (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Nuclear (after getting Television)


--------
Flight1:
--------

Must have: Combustion, Physics

What can you build with it:
Fighter (unit, air)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Flight2 (after getting Electric)


--------
Flight2:
--------

Must have: Electric, Flight1

What can you build with it:
Bomber (unit, air)
Carrier (unit, ocean only)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Rocketry (after getting Television)


--------
Flight3:
--------

Must have: Computers, Rocketry

What can you build with it:
SS Struct (spaceship)
Apollo P. (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Plastics (after getting Refining)


-------
Fusion:
-------

Must have: Nuclear, Supr Cndct

What can you build with it:
None..

What can you learn by knowing it:
None.. this is most commonly the last advance you get
before FutrTechs


---------
Genetics:
---------

Must have: Corporat'n, Medicine

What can you build with it:
CureCancer (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Nothing new..


--------
Gravity:
--------

Must have: Astronomy, University

What can you build with it:
N. College (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Atomic (after getting Physics)


----------
Gunpowder:
----------

Must have: Invention, Iron Work

What can you build with it:
Musket'rs
Also, your barracks will all be obsoleted..

What can you learn by knowing it:
Metallurgy (after getting University)
Explosives (after getting Chemistry)


-----------
Industrial:
-----------

Must have: Banking, Railroad

What can you build with it:
Transport (unit)
Factory (building)
Suffrage (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Communism (after getting Philosophy)
Corporat'n (after getting Banking)
Steel (after getting Metallurgy)


----------
Invention:
----------

Must have: Engin'rng, Literacy

What can you build with it:
Nothing new..

What can you learn by knowing it:
Steam Eng (after getting Physics)
Gunpowder (after getting Iron Work)


----------
Iron Work:
----------

Must have: Bronze Wrk

What can you build with it:
Legion (unit)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Bridging (after getting Construct)
Gunpowder (after getting Invention)


-----
Laws:
-----

Must have: Alphabet

What can you build with it:
Courthouse (building)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Monarchy (after getting Burial)
Trade (after getting Currency)
Literacy (after getting Writing)
Republic (after getting Literacy)


---------
Literacy:
---------

Must have: Laws, Writing

What can you build with it:
Great Lib (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Democracy (after getting Philosophy)
Invention (after getting Engin'rng)
Philosophy (after getting Mysticism)
Republic (after getting Laws)


-----------
Map Making:
-----------

Must have: Alphabet

What can you build with it:
Trireme (unit, ocean only)
Lighthouse (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Navigation (after getting Astronomy)


--------
Masonry:
--------

Learnable from start, sometimes already known.

What can you build with it:
Palace (building)
City Wall (building)
Pyramid  (wonder)
Great Wall (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Math (after getting Alphabet)
Stirrup (after getting Monarchy)
Construct (after getting Currency)


----------
Mass Prod:
----------

Must have: Automobile, Corporat'n

What can you build with it:
Sub (unit, ocean only)
Mass Trans (building)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Fission (after getting Atomic)
Supr Cndct (after getting Plastics)
Solar (after getting Democracy)
Union (after getting Communism)


-----
Math:
-----

Must have: Alphabet, Masonry

What can you build with it:
Catapult (unit)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Astronomy (after getting Mysticism)
Physics (after getting Navigation)
University (after getting Philosophy)
Computers (after getting Television)


---------
Medicine:
---------

Must have: Philosophy, Trade

What can you build with it:
S. Theater (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Chemistry (after getting University)
Genetics (after getting Corporat'n)


-----------
Metallurgy:
-----------

Must have: Gunpowder, University

What can you build with it:
Cannon (unit)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Steel (after getting Industrial)
Electric (after getting Compass)


---------
Monarchy:
---------

Must have: Burial, Laws

What can you build with it:
Nothing but the government

What can you learn by knowing it:
Stirrup (after getting Masonry)


----------
Mysticism:
----------

Must have: Burial

What can you build with it:
Oracle (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Astronomy (after getting Math)
Philosophy (after getting Literacy)


-----------
Navigation:
-----------

Must have: Astronomy, Map Making

What can you build with it:
Sail (unit)
Expedition (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Physics (after getting Math)
Compass (after getting Physics)


--------
Nuclear:
--------

Must have: Fission, Television

What can you build with it:
Nuke Pwr (building)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Fusion (after getting Supr Cndct)


-----------
Philosophy:
-----------

Must have: Literacy, Mysticism

What can you build with it:
Nothing new..

What can you learn by knowing it:
Democracy (after getting Literacy)
Medicine (after getting Trade)
University (after getting Math)
Religion (after getting Writing)
Communism (after getting Industrial)


--------
Physics:
--------

Must have: Math, Navigation

What can you build with it:
Nothing new..

What can you learn by knowing it:
Atomic (after getting Gravity)
Compass (after getting Navigation)
Steam Eng (after getting Invention)
Flight1 (after getting Combustion)


---------
Plastics:
---------

Must have: Flight3, Refining

What can you build with it:
SS Comp (spaceship)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Supr Cndct (after getting Mass Prod)
Robotics (after getting Computers)


--------
Pottery:
--------

Learnable from start, sometimes already known.

What can you build with it:
Granary (building)
B. Garden (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Nothing else..


---------
Railroad:
---------

Must have: Bridging, Steam Eng

What can you build with it:
D. Voyage (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Industrial (after getting Banking)


---------
Refining:
---------

Must have: Chemistry, Corporat'n

What can you build with it:
Pwr Plant (building)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Combustion (after getting Explosives)
Plastics (after getting Flight3)


---------
Religion:
---------

Must have: Philosophy, Writing

What can you build with it:
Cathedral (building)
M. Chapel (wonder)
JSB Cthdrl (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Nothing else..


---------
Republic:
---------

Must have: Laws, Literacy

What can you build with it:
Nothing but the government

What can you learn by knowing it:
Banking (after getting Trade)
Conscript (after getting Explosives)


-------
Riding:
-------

Learnable from start, sometimes already known.

What can you build with it:
Lcav (unit)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Chivalry (after getting Stirrup)


---------
Robotics:
---------

Must have: Computers, Plastics

What can you build with it:
Artillery (unit)
Manufac. P (building)
SS Module (spaceship)

What can you learn by knowing it:
None..


---------
Rocketry:
---------

Must have: Flight2, Television

What can you build with it:
Nukes (unit)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Flight3 (after getting Computers)


------
Solar:
------

Must have: Democracy, Mass Prod

What can you build with it:
Recycle C. (building)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Nothing new..


----------
Steam Eng:
----------

Must have: Invention, Physics

What can you build with it:
Ironclad (unit, ocean only)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Railroad (after getting Bridging)


------
Steel:
------

Must have: Industrial, Metallurgy

What can you build with it:
Battle Shp (unit)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Automobile (after getting Combustion)


--------
Stirrup:
--------

Must have: Masonry, Monarchy

What can you build with it:
Nothing new..

What can you learn by knowing it:
Chivalry (after getting Riding)


-----------
Supr Cndct:
-----------

Must have: Mass Prod, Plastics

What can you build with it:
SDI Dfnse (building)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Fusion (after getting Nuclear)


-----------
Television:
-----------

Must have: Electric, Engin'rng

What can you build with it:
Hydro Pwr (building)
Hoover Dam (wonder)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Computers (after getting Math)
Rocketry (after getting Flight2)
Nuclear (after getting Fission)


----------
The Wheel:
----------

Learnable from start, sometimes already known.

What can you build with it:
Chariot (unit)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Engin'rng (after getting Construct)


------
Trade:
------

Must have: Currency, Laws

What can you build with it:
Caravan (unit)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Medicine (after getting Philosophy)
Banking (after getting Republic)


------
Union:
------

Must have: Communism, Mass Prod

What can you build with it:
Mech Inf (unit)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Nothing new..


-----------
University:
-----------

Must have: Math, Philosophy

What can you build with it:
University (building)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Chemistry (after getting Medicine)
Metallurgy (after getting Gunpowder)
Gravity (after getting Astronomy)


--------
Writing:
--------

Must have: Alphabet

What can you build with it:
Diplomat (unit)
Library (building)

What can you learn by knowing it:
Religion (after getting Philosophy)
Literacy (after getting Laws)


---------------------
What about FutrTechs?
---------------------

Must have: All other 67 advances

What can you build with it:
More score, 5 per learning

What can you learn by knowing it:
Only more FutrTechs, until you reach 32, which is the SNES limit.. so, the
score will go up in the end by 160, if you manage to learn them all, which is
not that hard.


------------------
Curve of learning:
------------------

If you keep science in 100% (0.0.10), you will get always the same numbers for
science advances, their curves vary from the start, but they all get very
straight. I shouldn't call them curves, since they are straight lines, they are
arithmetic progressive.

- Chieftain: 10, 18, 24, 28, 30, 36, 42, 48, 54, 60, 66, 72, add 6 and so on.
- Warlord: 10, 18, 24, 32, 40, 48, 56, 64, 72, 80... add 8
- Prince: 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, .. always add 10
- King: 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, 72... always add 12
- Emperor: 14, 28, 42, ..add 14

This also shows you get to take more than double the time to get new expertises
on Emperor, if you stayed too much time on Chieftain, that is. These numbers
also are multiplied by higher numbers if you put science to lower percentages.
Let's take Prince for example. Your fifth advance will need 50 science points
if you have science at 100%, if you change it to 10%, it will take 500 points.
A formula will take place here:

Science advance need = NS * LV * SD

NS is the number of expertises you have.
LV is the difficulty level:
Cheftain = 6, Warlord = 8, Prince = 10, King = 12, Emperor = 14
SD is the science distribution number.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  XII- The Spaceship                                                  [00012]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What do you need to know about the spaceship? Well, not that much, it launchs
and it makes an ending happen, given you launch it inside the game time and the
landing is marked to a year inside the game time too, you get score for this,
which is 200, but sometimes you won't have time for the complete spaceship, so
I'm writing here the minor spaceship needs so you can launch it before the
aztecs or whoever is building one in your game.

All you need to launch for the ship to have a good rate of success is:
- 1 habitation module;
- 1 life Support module;
- 1 solor panel;
- 1 propulsion comp;
- 1 fuel comp;
- 19 structs to put things together enough.

One side will be disconneted, but it will take 16 years and the rate of
success will be 99%, which gives you always the correct landing.


----------
SS Struct:
----------

Cost to build: 80 resources
Since: Flight3
Complete spaceship: 34
Minor spaceship: 19 at least
Text: Allows the construction of spaceship modules and components.


--------
SS Comp:
--------

Cost to build: 160 resources
Since: Plastics
Complete spaceship: 16
Minor spaceship: 2, one of each
Text: Allows the construction of spaceship propulsion units and fuel. One of
each is required.


----------
SS Module:
----------

Cost to build: 320 resources
Since: Robotics
Complete spaceship: 12
Minor spaceship: 3, one of each
Text: Allows the construction of spaceship life-support, solar panels, and
living quarters. All are required.


----------------------
Launched it too early?
----------------------

It is said about the PC version that if you play too fast to build a spaceship,
and you launch it when years are passing more than two at a time, your
spaceship can land between years and be lost forever in time.... in SNES
version, this doesn't happen, I've tested it and seems that the ending catch up
in the next years it can, when I tested it, I could play such a quick game on
Chieftain that made it possible to buy a lot of parts and finish the ship to
launch at 680 AD. So, no spaceship glitch, you can play a quick spaceship game
if you want.

Also, spaceship parts cost double amount in cash, so you should buy another
building and then change it to the part you want. For structs, buy a
marketplace. For comps, buy a mass trans. For modules, buy a manufac. If you're
going to speed up this much, of course.


-------------------
Too low percentage?
-------------------

I have not tested building a spaceship and launching it with lowest percentages
of success, and ... maybe next version will have this information.



-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  XIII- The Paths                                                     [00013]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Well, I'll tell you, there are a few number of endings in a game, but there
certainly are hundreds, thousands of ways to do it differently. The main two
paths for a Civ game are the despotic conqueror and the democratic ostrich, but
the variations are still near infinity.


-----------------------
The Despotic Conqueror:
-----------------------

What you need: roughly, enemies to kill, as fast as you can. First, you put
your science to 10, and get some basic advances: Bronze and Iron work,
The Wheel, Math, Writing, Burial-Mysticism-Astronomy-Navigation, and then you
get to 0.10.0, only focusing on killing. That's all the science you need for
attacking.

Build chariots, catapults, phalanxes, settlers, diplomats, sails, and go to
wherever there is uncovered terrain, with roads and new cities. Any enemy you
find, destroy it at once. Take their cities and use them for more war units
production, if they want to speak to you, accept, and make a peace treaty so
you can tear it up again and kill them. If they don't want the peace, even
better, attack and attack more. If you lose units, don't worry too, there is
much more in production.

After all enemies are dead, roughly 12 civilizations, you win, usually in BC
years. My record is still 1.400 BC, and better yet, this game is quick enough
so you can play this way anytime you want. Just see how early you can conquer
the world.


-----------------------
The Democratic Ostrich:
-----------------------

What you need: roughly, all the terrain you can get. Build cities 4 squares
apart, max out science, when you get good production cities, you build JSB
Cathedral, Suffrage, and then change your government to Democracy, keeping a
good amount of luxury (lux). The points where the game will get easier are:

1- When you get railroads. Cities will grow up faster and use their resources
more widely.
2- After you build marketplaces and banks, taxes will help you more.
3- After the SETI Program, you'll see science accelerate a lot and get
expertise around 2 or 3 turns each.

Get all futrtechs, keep the peace, build up the spaceship in the end, build all
the wonders, if an enemy got them first, go there diplomaticly and buy it. Max
out score making everyone in cities happy, build aqueducts, cathedrals,
colosseums, temples, mass trans, libraries universities, and courthouses. In
the last 5 turns before the spaceship arrive, distribution should change to
10.0.0, which you should use sometimes in the middle too, when you have too
much money, and the need of city growing. After a city gets all buildings it
need, keep selling SDI defense or Manufacs and you should get even richer.

This game is long, but you'll get a really big score in the end, usually more
than 300% if done right =)

Oh, some people use a Monarchy stage in the middle, I prefer to skip it, it's
a waste of trade. And trade is everything in a democratic ostrich game.

And... for cities above 20 in size, you won't get extra score, so build a
smaller city near it and use their food to get two cities at size 20.

You can play democratic ostrich with less than 10 cities if you want, but
cornering the enemy and populating all the world with cities is part of the fun
to me, so I prefer to build as many cities as possible. It's more score too =)


-------------------------
The Republic Alternative:
-------------------------

That's my favorite path. Instead of using Democracy, go with Republic. This
way, no rioting can throw your government away. And after you have around 60
cities, it's almost impossible to keep track of all happiness and fast growing.
The odds are you'll have a city stuck at level 3 with a lot of resources to use
around and not using them. Have a time in around 50 turns to see all cities and
what they're doing.


----------------
The Hi-tech War:
----------------

You were a democratic ostrich, but forgot to corner the enemy, or found out
later there were others, and now they're stepping all your irrigation and even
plundering? You can always change back to a war game if you want. Go against
them and destroy them later. What can an enemy do with chariots and legions if
you send some armors at them? How can a sail get near your shores if there is a
cruiser or battleship waiting there? You can even nuke them enemies away, why
not? The score will be lower, but the fun won't =P


-----------------------
The Ninja Civilization:
-----------------------

You got behind in science, and there are two enemies competing against each
other? Okay, here's a good path for you: hide away and wait for them as they go
often to war against each other. Send some diplomats with ocean units to move
them, so they will not try and track you, and get some technologies. You can
even buy their good cities if you get enough money. They will get it back soon,
but their war units will vanish, or even become yours.


---------------------
The Archipelago Game:
---------------------

It's rare, but sometimes you start in an island, and all your sails finds are
more and more islands. If you have to play like this, you can still go ostrich,
and build your cities in different continents, the harder part will be the
Hoover dam, which should be built on the bigger continent you can.


--------------------
Score and the paths:
--------------------

A game you conquer all enemies will have as score your number of years before a
certain specific year that is the outline.

But a game you conquer the space will have usually bigger scores, based on the
number of happy citizens doubled, the number of citizens, the number of years
with peace (counting barbarians), +20 for each wonder of the world you got,
+200 for the spaceship (complete), and +5 for each futrtech.

Example:
So, 200, 420, 160, 100, and the limit 125*20 = 2500, doubling about 50% of the
citizens would be 1250, 3750+420+160+200+100= ... would be 4630, roughly, you
won't get this without a very good starvation managing of bigger cities and
good choice of city places, so you won't waste any good spot. The enemy should
be in a corner and one or two of your cities should eat up his resources, with
are already locked on all 8 sides by diplomats anyway. With luck, only 2 or 3
diplomats will be needed. My best score so far was 454%, which was 4546 on the
information->score screen. With the number of cities above 60, it starts to get
hard to have them protected, but after some years, barbarians cease, and you
won't need any protection, only use all the resources for the building of
happiness increasing improvements and a little pollution control, since global
warming means less score too.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  XIV- Spoiler-free Ending                                            [00014]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are actually 4 ways of ending a game. One of them is defeat, of course.

Ending 1: You destroy everyone. What happens is you win, and your score is
determined on how early it is in the game.

Ending 2: You launch yourself into space. If you reach this, your scoring will
be based on happy citizens, wonders, peace, spaceship parts built, and the year
won't matter.

Ending 3: Time over. You can continue playing, but with no score. Meeting one
of the conditions for the other ending will just lead you directly to the title
screen.

Ending 4: When you lose your last city and don't have any more mercenary units,
it's time to see this ending, many years pass, and some people discover traces
of a long lost civilization from the past, which was yours.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  XV- Different Versions                                              [00015]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Main differences between this and PC version:
1- There is a limit to city size, it only goes to 28.
2- There is a limit too on how much units you can have, it's 63 of each and 127
total.
3- FutureTechs are FutrTechs and only go until it reaches 32, then you keep
learning 32 over and over again.
4- There is no replay feature.
5- There is no palace improvements, it's just one palace.
6- No encyclopedia.
7- Any civilization can start with 2 settlers.
8- There is the japan instead of zulu, and the colors are changed.
9- You can't use the build over water glitch, nor the sentry glitch.
10- Not completely tested yet,  but you can't build a city on North/South Pole.
I'll test this with a little global warming in the future.
11- After you grow a city to a size there would be an 11th Elvis, a tax
collector will take place instead. He'll count as 2 3 or 4 gold points income.
It is said that in the PC version they don't count.
12- When you bribe a unit in PC version, they're owned by NONE. In this
version, they're owned by your nearest city.
13- You can launch a spaceship much earlier than 1.755 AD, the game catch up
in the next year it can and start to run the ending.
14- Cities have slightly different names, as I'll put in the next part.


------------
Cities list:
------------

We find some differences in city names too. Here's the list of all suggestion
name cities you can get. Names repeated will be marked with an asterisk.

American: Washington, New York, Boston, Philly, Atlanta, Chicago, Buffalo,
St. Louis, Detroit, New Orlns, Baltimore, Denver, Cincinatti, Dallas, Los
Angls, Las Vegas.

Aztec: Tenochttln, Chiauhtia, Chapultpc, Coatepec, Ayotzinco, Itzapalapa,
Iztapam, Mitxcoac, Tacubaya, Tecamac, Tepezinco, Ticoman, Tlaxcala, Xaltocan,
Xicalango, Zumpanco.

Babylonian: Babylon, Sumer, Uruk, Nineveh, Ashur, Ellipi, Akkad, Eribu, Kish,
Nippur, Shuruppak, Zariqum, Izibia, Nimrud, Arbera, Zamua.

Chinese: Peking, Shanghai, Canton, Nanking, Tsingtao, Hangchow*, Tientsin,
Tatung, Macao, Anyang, Chantung, Chinan, Kaifeng, Ningpo, Paoting, Hangchow*.

Egyptian: Thebes, Memphis, Oryx, Heliopos, Gaza, Alexandria, Byblos, Cairo,
Coptos, Edfu, Pithom, Busiris, Atheibis, Mendes, Tunis, Abydos.

English: London, Coventry, Birmingham, Dover, Nottingham, York, Liverpool,
Brighton, Oxford, Reading, Exeter, Cambridge, Hastings, Canterbury, Banbury,
Newcastle.

French: Paris, Orleans, Lyons, Tours, Chartres, Bordeaux, Rouen, Avignon,
Marseilles, Grenoble, Dijon, Amiens, Cherbourg, Poitiers, Toulouse, Bayonne.

German: Berlin, Leipzig, Hamburg*, Bremen, Frankfurt, Bonn, Nuremberg, Cologne,
Hannover, Munich, Stuttgart, Heidelberg, Salzburg*, Koenigsbrg, Dortmund,
Brandenbrg.

Greek: Athens, Sparta, Corinth, Delphi, Eretria, Pharsalos, Argos, Micenae,
Herakleia, Antioch*, Ephesos, Rhodes, Knossos, Troy, Pergamon, Miletos.

Indian: Delhi, Bombay, Madras, Bangalore, Calcutta, Lahore, Karachi, Kolhapur,
Jaipur, Hyderabad, Bengal, Chittagong, Punjab, Dacca, Indus, Ganges.

Japanese: Tokyo, Kyoto, Osaka, Nagoya, Yokohama, Kobe, Fukuoka, Sendai,
Kanazawa, Sapporo, Matsuyama, Akita, Hiroshima, Nagasaki, Nara, Kamakura.

Mongol: Samarkand, Bokhara, Nishapur, Karakorum, Kashgar, Tabriz, Aleppo,
Kabul, Ormuz, Basra, Khanbaryk, Khorasan, Shangtu, Kazan, Qyinsay, Kerman.

Roman: Rome, Caesarea, Carthage, Nicopolis, Byzantium, Brundisum, Syracuse,
Antioch*, Palmyra, Cyrene, Gordion, Tyrus, Jerusalem, Seleucia, Ravenna,
Artaxata.

Russian: Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev, Minsk, Smolensk, Odessa, Sevastopol, Tblisi,
Sverdlovsk, Yakutsk, Vladivostk, Novograd, Krasnoyrsk, Riga, Rostov, Astrakhan.

Additional cities: Mecca, Naples, Tyre, Tarsus, Issus, Cunaxa, Cremona, Cannae,
Capua, Turin, Genoa, Utica, Crete, Damascus, Verona, Salamis, Lisbon, Hamburg*,
Prague, Salzburg, Bergen, Venice, Milan, Ghent, Pisa, Cordoba, Seville, Dublin,
Toronto, Melbourne, Sydney.

After Sydney, you get to write the name of new cities your way. You can do it
with imagination, with lists, with numbers, with random character press, with
whatever you want. I've did the test of building cities until the game said
'You can't build a city any more' too, the maximum number of cities it can
handle is 125, although I thought it would be 127...


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  XVI- FAQ                                                            [00016]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Q- The enemies keep outsmarting me! What do I do?
A- Well, you can look at The Paths section and try different approaches. It's
not hard to change your game style to try and revert the situation, and don't
rush into next turns when you're losing, think what you can do to keep enemies
away and try to raise your money so you can steal their technology with some
diplomats.

Q- Whichi percent those names I get with my percent score really are?
A- Well, I've played the game on Cheiftain difficulty some times to get all the
list, since it gives out only 7 names each complete game, but the percentages
are not 100% accurate.
1. Solomon the Wise - 150% ?
2. Emperor Augustus - 132% ?
3. King Charlemagne
4. Thomas Jefferson - 103% ?
5. Shogun Tokugawa - 87% ?
6. Franklin Roosevelt
7. Sulayman the Magnificent
8. Winston Churchill
9. Cleopatra
10. Charles de Gaulle
11. Vladimir Lenin - 36% ?
12. Simon Bolivar
13. Otto von Bismarck
14. Eric the Red
15. Kaiser Wilhelm
16. Louis the XIII - 12% ?
17. Neville Chamberlain
18. Ferdinand Marcos
19. Emperor Nero
20. Dan Quayle - 1%


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  XVII- Copyright                                                     [00017]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This document should not be used in any way to earn money. It's for personal
use only. If you wish to use this document on your site, ask me first, and tell
me where it's going to be.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  XVIII- Credits                                                      [00018]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Well, the game designers, gameFAQs for hosting it, and my parents =P
Oh, and Sid Meier too =P


Copyright 2015 by Jungon

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------